## On Craving, Communes and Buddhist Philosophy
"
[...]

What I feel I can take away is this: there is a subtle distinction between yearning and craving. And that's tough. Because one is essential for life, and the other is a trap which saps all your happiness. To contribute to and live in a caring community is a dream I will always carry and work towards. But the fact I need to acknowledge is that when it does come about, it will be nothing like the fantasy that has been knocking about in my head for the past 8 years. And that is fine. In fact, that is great. Not knowing how things will go is one of the chief joys of life. And to me the difference between yearning and craving is in the acceptance and appreciation of this fact. Indeed, the joy should always be in the process, in the striving itself. In the here and now. Because that is all there is. There is no end product we are entitled to.

So now, when I find myself dreaming about moving to Freiburg into an 8 person shared apartment, or giving Berkeley another shot for my PhD, or going back to Dublin to start something, or wherever else my mind has chosen as the Eden of the week, where I am convinced the idealised community will finally fall into place, all I can do is pause and laugh. Because I know that once I do arrive, there will be a million excuses as to why it's just not quite perfect. But also, perhaps even more so, because I know that if I did move to any of these places I would have an incredible time, meet incredible people and find a caring community. *The paradise I have been seeking was never a place I could go, but something within myself, and those around me*. Far from unachievable, it has actually always been there already. I just need to keep practicing the art of seeing it and tending to it."

[Read in full](content/OCCBP.html){target="_blank"}
[Expand here](content/OCCBP.md){.expand-essay}