# On Red vs Blue and the Unbearable Individuality of Being

So maybe I'll convince someone I love to watch the entire series with me one day. Maybe they'll love it, and share in my obsession and understand how it impacted my development as a person. Probably not though. And that's fine. It won't stop me trying. With Red Vs Blue and Sugar Pine 7 and all the other weird shows and films that shaped me. With the music I love and the books that changed my thinking. With the indescribable experiences and quirky little thoughts I've had. With the foods I dream about and the smells that conjure vivid memories. With all the random things that have made up my unique little life. It will never stop me from trying to find those who relate, those who connect, and those who can understand. Because when I think about it, in the infinity of possible lived and interpreted experience, it's pretty incredible just how much commonality we are consistently able to find. And I suppose, if I am really honest with myself, it’s pretty exciting that it’ll never all be contained in one person.

My thoughts on this, as on many other things, are ultimately that all I must do is try. And just like I was told to as a kid, I am going to try my very best to share as much as I can. To share, openly and honestly and with enthusiasm, especially when it is hard. And to relish when others take the time to share in kind. To delight in the fact that we choose to do it regardless. That we may never know for sure whether and how the message is received, but we try anyway.