# On Craving, Communes and Buddhist Philosophy

*Disclaimer: To borrow a phrase from the great Robert M. Pirsig, this essay should in no way be associated with the great body of factual information relating to Buddhist practice. It's not very informational about building intentional communities, either.*  
	  
When I was 16, I thought of university as the absolute peak of life. Dreams abounded of house parties, gripping lectures and people with all the same interests who would just *get me man*. And, at the core of it all, I had some conception of a dream friend group I would meet there. A group who live together, cook together, explore together and forge those kinds of bonds that are only built in the crucible of sharing every aspect of your life. This group would go on road trips and camping trips. They would support each other through high and low. And, somewhere along the way, I would fall in love with one of the people from this friend group. We would have some sort of will-they-won’t-they romance, and between stolen glances, interventions from friends, drunken confessions and fate itself, we would transition from friends to lovers.

And sure, that’s all a bit Hollywood. As most teenage fantasies are, in fairness. To give myself credit, I don’t think I would have put it in such flowery terms at the time. Things become caricatures of themselves in the narrativising lens of retrospect. But undoubtedly, from my teenage years and beyond, I had some idealised concept of love and community that filled my daydreams and sunk deep down into my psyche. And, more importantly, I had some conception of what I needed to do to get at it. I just needed to go live somewhere new, somewhere where the people are interesting and the sense of community strong, and then everything else would fall into place. It was the natural next step in life as I saw it anyways, so how hard could it be?

Unfortunately for me, I grew up in Dublin. A city where moving out at 18 is an unbelievably expensive endeavour. And though I briefly harboured dreams of a University in Scotland, my parents made it clear that there was a limit to the support they could give for the financially irresponsible decision of not studying from the cushy suburban house in which I was raised. A house I should add, with plenty of space, a university down the road and where I was given plenty of freedom and my food, heating bills and other daily expenses would be paid for. Woe be me, I suppose. Far from a tragic story. But one that meant my dreams of a live-in-community stayed as dreams. And, as the slow churnings of time took hold, and I saw friends who got to move out and seemingly live that dream university life, began to look ever more like obsessions.

*I was about 19 years old when I first met a man named the Buddha. I had heard of him, of course, in pop culture and allusions to meditation and articles about the Dalai Lama and such. In fact, in the way such things can be more about identity than substance, especially as a teenager, I think I loudly proclaimed myself a fan before I ever really knew what he had to say. But at 19 I first properly encountered him. Through a westernised lens, no doubt, but one I still consider fairly true to form. And, realistically, one which my westernised brain was most susceptible to anyway. I, unsurprisingly, liked what he had to say immediately. As an anxious, overthinking young adult with intense existential dread, his words offered all important hope and calm. The beautiful ideas that we are all the universe itself, that suffering is downstream of unnecessary desire, and that there is the potential of an enlightened escape.*

In the very same book, I also first encountered the idea of a commune. Once again, as a self-proclaimed Anarchist, I had surely also encountered the idea before. But, if my memory serves me correctly, it was this very same book that lodged the idea irretrievably in my skull. That, much like with the teachings of the Buddha, made me engage with the topic properly, and begin to actively seek out any and all literature I could on the topic. And so I read and learned and began to imagine living on a plot of land with all my friends. To dream of an intentional community where everyone helped out with whatever skills they had, shared spaces, meals and appliances and worked together to make a beautiful place to live. Where old people could help ease the burden of childcare and children could roam in safety. Where community and connection was guaranteed, and everyone still had their own space to retreat to. Where life would be healthier, cheaper and more sustainable, and where all this would give the residents the opportunity to step back from the pressures of capitalism and the treadmill of consumption that forms the deathbed of so many morals and convictions. It felt, indeed, like I had found the non-Hollywood version of that community I so desperately craved. A realistic, or at least already trodden path which had the potential to, in the words of Kurt Vonnegut, “cure the terrible disease of loneliness”. And a new direction for my schemes, plans and small steps to head towards.

Only a year later, I found myself taking a rather large step in that direction. I decided to put my all into applying for a year-long exchange at the University of California, Berkeley. Not only because it was undoubtedly one of the most prestigious exchange partners my university had, and specialised precisely in the ecological economics and applied statistics I was interested in at the time. But most primarily because it was there where I had found a real, tangible and joinable student housing co-operative. An example, full of people my age, of precisely the type of intentional community which had become my obsession. A place where I could learn what actually into organising and living in a real cooperative housing situation. It didn’t hurt that I could live out my childhood dream of the perfect college experience while I was at it, either. The plan gave me a renewed vigour for college, and after a lot of studying and multiple rounds of applications, I was accepted into the exchange and secured a spot in the housing cooperative.

*The best laid plans of mice and men and all that. The very day my acceptance for the co-op arrived, the news was filling up with stories of a novel disease which had just arrived in Italy and my university announced it was moving online. COVID-19 would go on to disrupt a great many more important things, but for me the impact began with the complete cancellation of the exchange that was my ticket to a dream life. Instead, boarding an emergency flight home from the Netherlands, I arrived at home one day, and remained there for the majority of the next year.*   
*It's easy to lament that time. People died, loneliness abounded, and the world was forever changed. I find it hard to feel too sorry for myself personally, though. My little dream was dead. But there was also a blessing. Because I suddenly had the precious resource of time. I was stuck at home with not much to do, and thoughts and anxieties crashing around in my brain. And I decided it was high time I went back to those teachings of Buddha's that had inspired me so, to take implementing them into my life a bit more seriously. So I picked up a meditation practice, honed my gratefulness and began to take stock of my cravings. I cut back on desire and belongings where I felt I could. And in the first iteration of the very format you are reading now, I took the time to reflect, consider and write down some of my revelations. The collection of essays I curated was entitled ‘A Letter to Clara’, as it was designed as a gift for my Sister's 18th birthday. It contained essays exploring a wide variety of topics, written by myself and some dear friends to whom I entrusted a page. And in the final piece, entitled ‘On music and enjoying life’, I put to words my own particular combination of mindfulness, gratitude and habit of dancing like crazy in bathrooms which had become central to keeping me sane in times I felt increasingly incapable of dealing with.*

*And all this saved me. Or saved my brain at least, from the increasingly inescapable spirals of panic I had become prone to slipping down. Of course, the progress was uneven, the lessons would eternally have to be relearned and many of the practices I built up then when time was abundant were not fated to last. But undeniably, they gave me a lot. And in the shaky, winding road to enlightened bliss I took some determined strides, have stood by me since.*

The following year of my undergraduate came and went. The commune became something I was known for going on about, trying to convince friends and acquaintances it was the solution to all our problems, and that one day I would be inviting them to join me there. My cancelled year abroad and the housing co-op in Berkeley became a topic I would talk about wistfully, staring off into the middle distance as I said something along the lines of: “It would have been nice, but it wasn't meant to be.” And, having come so close to achieving a childhood dream of mine only to have it taken away, a deep-rooted sense that I had missed out on some essential formative experience began to build up within me. Every time a friend would talk about their first year university dorms, or their insane exchange semester or some other similar experience, I would feel a horrible pang of jealousy. I began to feel, I guess, like my imagined college life was an experience I was somehow owed. It was a thought I was embarrassed of even at the time, considering just how fortunate I've been and how much I have always had around me to appreciate, but I cannot deny it was there. 

I had no intention of letting this feeling simply stew within me forever, though. Ever the pragmatist, I returned to aspiration. There was still plenty of time, I reminded myself. I just had to buckle down and be ready for the next opportunity to join such a community, and if that didn’t work out, I had to work on creating the next opportunity myself. So I set about hatching plans of communes and masters courses, hostel jobs and squatted buildings \- any ways I could think of to find that perfect community I was still dreaming about. I had so many plans, and they were all so exciting, all I had to do was get through my last year and a half of university in Dublin and I could start setting them into motion.

*By the time summer rolled around that year, the community living dreams were locked in, but began to take a backseat as more immediate currents flowed through my mind. The strictest lockdowns of COVID had ended, and a new aspiration had emerged within me: a dream of bike touring around the world. And in the Summer of 22, I decided to set out on a practice mission for this new dream. Two close friends, Dan and Jim, decided to join, and a plan was hatched to cycle from the coast of France through Belgium and on to Amsterdam. My excitement was palpable from the moment we launched, although this endeavour too was fated not to go as planned. Only three days in, on a hill in Normandy, my previously injured knee gave way to my overloaded bike. And through my initially stubborn will to push on, born from a belief this was just another ache of the road, I was left horizontal by that evening. To venture much further than the campsite by bicycle was to invite serious risk of permanent injury, so I stayed put for the time being, while Dan and Jim went on a detour to explore Mont Saint Michel. Two days later, despite rest and stretching, the pain still lingered, and it was clear I would have to temporarily abandon the plans. Those nights, in the cheap French public campsite where our tents would be visited by hungry foxes at night and our giant Irish flag billowed over our tents, I cannot deny I was teetering on the edge of despair. Despite their extreme patience and efforts to boost me, I knew there was only so long it made sense for my friends to hang around as I wallowed in the misery of a plan which could have been, and a body which would not comply. So they went on without me, and I took a train to Paris to rest up.*  
 *It's funny, despite the drama of my initial reaction, once my new course was set, and I was moving again, I found myself in a familiarly pensive, excitable mood. My brain has begun testing out the waters of reasons this had to be. Narratives that could make sense of it all, so I didn't just have to accept the unfortunate circumstances as time wasted, were being constructed at a rapid pace. The fear lingered that my injury may be permanent of course, but the reality was that the only thing I could do was rest, stretch and wait. And so I did. It didn’t take long for fate to strike, either. Or at least for my mind to complete the narrative to make it so. Because there in Paris, waiting in the shelves of one of my favourite second hand bookshops, was an old copy of the Dhammapada. Meaning over the next weeks, perfectly interwoven with these more immediate and practical lessons about acceptance and letting go of expectation, I was once again enraptured by a slice of Buddhist thought. As the first actual book of Buddhist scripture I read, I cannot lie that much of the prescriptions felt quite a bit aspirational for my modern life \- one so undeniably full of desires and cravings I simply could not even imagine letting go. But with each page I read, the feeling was underscored that there was an undeniable well of wisdom in these pages and practices which I should not ignore. My resolve to attempt some steps down the Noble Eightfold Path was renewed, and I could think of no better place than on my bike to start putting it all into practice.*

Jim and Dan arrived in Paris, with the addition of Kai, with whom I had completed my first ever bike tour a year prior. And, getting antsy from all the waiting, I decided I was well enough to accompany Kai and cycle 200km to a party in the French countryside, before rejoining Jim and Dan for the rest of our trip. To any outside observer, it was likely already clear how this hasty newfound plan would unfold \- it too was fated to crumple against the mountains of reality. Only 30 kilometres outside of Paris my knee was once again in agony and the prospect of making it to the party in time seemed slim. But it was also right then, pushing my bike along when I could no longer cycle, that two French twins with literal baguettes strapped to their bicycles stopped, chatted to us and made all the misadventures and false starts up until that point seem like fate. You see they, on hearing we were looking for a place to camp, offered for us to come stay on their farm. And the farm in question, from the moment I arrived, felt like a place I must have dreamed up. It was a communal, organic farm run on public land by an eclectic group of locals and blow-ins. It was a home for those who worked the farm and a collection of other characters, who lived together, ate together, drank together and yet also maintained their own lives. It was a real place where so many of the ideas I had dreamed about were being tried out actually and consequently. That first night we stayed up late cooking an incredible feast and smoking joints with the farm's inhabitants. And though Kai and I set off early the next morning to make our deadline, it came as no surprise to myself or Kai or our new French friends when an hour into cycling my knee gave way, and I turned back to finally, actually, rest up until healed in this magical oasis straight out of my dreams.

I was accepted back with open arms, but it was no holiday. Same as for everyone else, to earn my stay on the farm meant to help out. Although the exact terms of this were ones I was far from used to. You see, ideologically motivated or not, the undercurrent for everything on the farm was that work should be self-motivated. There was no schedule, no strictly assigned tasks or hours that needed to be worked. There were daily chores to be done for all the animals of course, and when school groups came to visit, someone had to be there to teach them about ecological farming and making houses out of straw and mud as this was the main way the farm made money. Someone had to do these things, and someone always did. But if you weren't feeling up to it on a given day, no excuse was needed to take a break. It was plenty to say you were hungover or just not in the mood, so long as on the whole, you contributed your fair share. The big emphasis, then, was on finding a project that you wanted to do that could help the farm. I personally didn't have many applicable skills, so I spent my first days helping others out in whatever way I could, mostly with the twins' irrigation project and the potato harvest. Eventually, though, I found a particular goal well suited to me: carting the mountain of glass bottles that had built up on the farm to the nearest bottle bank. It was a simple task, but one which had been neglected for so long that everyone who lived there had a mental block about even starting it for fear of becoming responsible. And so as the new arrival with no hang-ups or farming skills and a burning desire to do something to help, it was the perfect fit for me. Not to mention the fact that trundling through the French countryside at my own pace with a makeshift cart full of bottles on a warm summer's day was a very pleasant task in itself.

All in all, my project took almost three days, mostly done in the afternoons when I tended to have time and energy. And it wasn’t long before I noticed that each trip I was seeing the same people in the bin trucks coming and going from the recycling centre. The, admittedly much harder, real version of what I was doing. I say I noticed, but that's not actually true, because they noticed me first, and it was the beeps of these trucks and friendly waves of their drivers that made me realise they recognised me, and what's more, that the image of some pasty limping Irish guy with his cart full of glass clattering behind him was one they somehow appreciated. I know that's a lot of context for a seemingly small moment, but I cannot overstate how joyous this work felt to me, and how appreciated each and every one of those beeps made me feel. In so many ways, the whole process cemented, on a much deeper level than the intellectual anarchist readings I so enjoyed, that work does not have to be an alienating or soul-destroying process. It's a lesson and a time I think about a lot, and one that only hardened my resolve to one day live in an intentional community where this utopian concept version of work could become closer to my reality.

In that, and so many other ways, the farm made the dream of the commune seem more real and more important. There, in front of me was an actual example of exactly what I had been looking for. And what’s more, spending time there I was learning so much each day, skills for farming and cohabitation and lessons on what worked and what didn’t. And that’s not even to mention the incredible friends I made along the way and the insane experiences we shared. It wasn't all perfect, of course. I didn't speak French, they weren't looking for someone to stay longer, and the project remained the darling brainchild of its founder, Guillem. But the farm was a beautiful and affirming sample of what could be. It may not have been the place for me in the end, but it was there, and that was a delightful thought in itself. Besides, after two weeks my knee was finally healed up enough for some actual cycling, and I was long overdue in rejoining Dan and Jim who had taken their summer to join me on this journey in the first place. So I cycled back to Paris, boarded a bus for Brussels, and joined them for the final leg of the cycle into the Netherlands. The beginning of an adventure in its own right, but a story for another time.

All that came and went and life continued its relentless march. *Buddhist philosophy* and the commune became ever deeper parts of who I was. But the forefront of my mind was far too preoccupied with love and cycling and politics to give it all more than an occasional ponder. <a href="previews/OCCBP.md" class="expand-essay">I fell in love</a>, graduated from college, set off on the long awaited world expedition, worked in hostels across Spain and Germany, cycled as far as Georgia and met, lived with and learned from countless fascinating people, continuously expanding my worldview in turn. And the whole time I carried and expanded my erstwhile dream of the perfect community. *I also meditated when possible, kept my personal possessions to a minimum, tried to avoid craving and to focus on giving back. I experienced* *emotional highs and lows and, as much as I could, let them wash over me with appreciation rather than fighting them tooth and nail. I read about Daoism and The Way, another philosophy that inspired me to live with tranquillity and acceptance. And somewhere in the midst of it all I realised there were entire weeks when I had just been absolutely content.*  
*Something was working.*

My year on the road came to an end with the acceptance of a Masters in Berlin. And in many ways, it was precisely the opportunity I had been waiting for since my teenage years. I would get to study in a new city, live with people my own age, and build up that community I had always dreamed of. In the city of radicals, collectives and communes that had always excited me, I would finally make it all a reality. Of course, there were some logistical things to figure out first. Finding an apartment in Berlin proved incredibly difficult, and so the hope of living in an intentional community gave way to the pragmatic search for any reasonably affordable place to live. My masters was tough, and working shifts at the hostel before class with a 6am wake-up time meant there wasn’t much time for much else but work, study and a decent measure of socialising. But life was good. Some of the good mood from the bike trip was still billowing in my sails. And to be fair to myself, I had managed to move to a new city, make a group of amazing friends, find love and was learning lots every day. There were ups, there were downs, but I couldn’t complain. Or at least, I ought not to have.  
I probably did though. Because I still had some itch to scratch. Some aspects of my inner child's dream of perfect community were left unfulfilled. The apartment I ended up in was bleak and isolating. My newly formed polyamorous relationship was far from the uncomplicated ideal of love I had imagined. And my new friends were adults with their own lives, priorities and without the boundless energy and enthusiasm of undergraduates. It was all okay, though. This was a very good life. And besides, I had another chance. I was going on exchange to China in my third semester, leaving Berlin only a year after setting my roots down. And in China, I would be living in student dorms full of people from all over the world, sharing a room even. I felt certain that there I would find my people. I mean, we would all be in a new place, living in close quarters through the shared experience of cultural shock with plenty of free time and drive to explore. That had to be it. The perfect recipe. My cancelled exchange to Berkeley having taken up an almost mythical status in my mind, I felt certain that Tsinghua University Beijing, though half a world away, would finally lay all the yearning to rest.

*Time passed, months filled up with work and college and activism and love and life. And I got that feeling again. That something big was coming. That I would soon be out and alone and on the road searching to see what I could find. The long awaited date finally came, and I boarded my flight to Taiwan, where I was to spend a month travelling before arriving in Beijing in time for the start of the semester. I was unbelievably excited to be a regular backpacker again. To encounter a new culture, try the food, meet the people and to start earnestly practicing my Mandarin.*

*It planned out to be an unbelievable trip. Action packed, unendingly exciting and truly eye-opening, a fantastic time altogether. I was admittedly somewhat pensive and sensitive throughout, however. Having broken up with my partner just before leaving, and finally having time to digest the chaos of all the protesting, studying, working, drinking, moving, climbing and barely sleeping across my last months in Berlin, everything just felt like quite a lot.* More generally, I was worried I had untethered myself from the communities I had connected with in Berlin with my vanishing act after only a year. Worried that on my arrival back, I might find that that they no longer existed or that I no longer belonged. *Luckily for me, my old friend Buddhism was all around me and happy to help. At temples and shrines, in info panels and carved characters, there were the same teachings I had read about in books and found so unbelievably important. And what's more, I could now immerse myself in the architecture, traditions, deities and ceremonies that accompanied the Mahayana Buddhist tradition in Taiwan. Walking around those temples, seeing the worn steps of hundreds of years of visitors and the offerings at the feet of various Brahmin and Bodhisattvas I was gifted with some of the most important calm I had found in quite a while.*

*And then, almost three weeks into my journey, staying in the city of Kaohsiung, I heard about the temple of the Big Buddha. The supposed resting place of a piece of Sakyamuni Buddha’s tooth, the temple consisted of a sprawling complex centred around a gigantic statue of the Buddha: seated, serene and towering. I knew I had to see it, and ventured out to visit with some friends from the hostel, embarking on a multi hour combination of public transportation in the sweltering Taiwan heat to get there. On arrival though, in the large, freshly built welcoming foyer our bus dropped us at, I was greeted not with a quiet temple, but with air conditioning, a Starbucks and a souvenir shop. The temple itself was modern but imposing, impressive, and beautifully designed. Across the complex were activities and exhibitions, preserved historical artifacts and opportunities to learn calligraphy and history, to pray and to reflect, all staffed by the most incredibly open, friendly and cheerful monks. In short, it was a wonderful place. The type of place I try to encounter with enthusiasm and inquisitiveness.*

*Somewhere at the back of my mind though I couldn’t stop thinking about that entrance hall. I spent the day exploring, I practised calligraphy, learned about the founder, saw the relics and the history, and took it all in. But the Starbucks had changed how I viewed the place. An establishment I have been boycotting for a long time, and which to me symbolises some of the horrors of monopolistic global capitalism (see their union busting and complicity in the ongoing genocide of Palestinians), was not one I associated with the Buddhist faith of my books or my imagination. Its presence upset me, and forced me to content with a more nuanced modern iteration of the Buddhist faith than I had spent much time thinking about previously. One indelibly interlinked, as all things are, with our world as it stands. It wasn’t about the temple itself really. I mean who the hell was I to feel I had any authority to say what they should or shouldn’t use their entrance hall for. They have budgets to be balanced, I’m sure, or maybe they just like the coffee. My discomfort, really, was stemming from within. From the world not being as simple as to contain neat packaged philosophies with uniform universal implementation which I could simply adopt. It was a small thing, but it somehow felt big. My fragile belief system was fraying at the edges, and a process had started that felt hard to stop. The relentless march of cynicism was threatening to consume even the small wonders I had sought to protect from it.*

More generally, too, in the latter half of my time in Taiwan, I found myself with a terrible sinking loneliness. Far from everyone I knew, made even more distant by my own tendency for lack of communication, I was thinking about Vonnegut's quote about curing the terrible disease of loneliness through the creation of community no longer in the abstract but as an absolute necessity. The raw feelings had intensified and everything felt huge and weighty, important and intractable. The ups were soaring and the lows crushing, and I was, unsuccessfully as always, trying to fill the gaping hole in my heart with flings and flirtation. In short, I was travelling somewhere new, somewhere I felt I should be happy, and yet in the contrast I was only made more aware of the discontentedness I had brought with me. I had a lot of thinking to do, and I knew that it was all very important. But I couldn't help getting frustrated at myself at how long it was all taking, with so many days disappearing into solemn pondering, when what I really wanted was bliss.

*One week later I was in the mountains, staying by a lake. Waiting for the road to be clear to a national park I wanted to visit, and enjoying some days of wandering in nature. And at the top of the hill near the town I was staying, there was a Pagoda. One I had briefly visited on a bike ride around the lake the day before, when the sky was gray and overcast and there was not much to be seen. Already the day before, it had filled me with some feeling of potential. A thought of what a wonderful view it might contain, if only the weather was cooperating. And on that particular morning, the weather was clear. Scorching hot, but clear. I had three hours to kill, a bike rental still running, and an hour and a half round trip to reach the top. I knew I had to go back up. So I did. The trip, though short, was almost entirely uphill, which on a bike in the summer heat was an incredibly taxing endeavour. But I was in the mood to persevere. Just about halfway up the hill I encountered another Buddhist temple. Once I had bypassed the day before, but which somehow called to me in that moment. Luckily, I had not yet forgotten my most important lesson in life: there is still so much I do not know. So despite the layer of cynicism I had built up, I stopped.*  
*And I entered. And I read the story of Xuanzang, a 7th century Buddhist monk from China who travelled all the way to India and back to study Buddhism and translate key texts. And I once again read the tale of Siddartha. And about the noble eightfold path. And the roots of suffering in desire. And when I got to Xuanzang’s tooth relic I bowed deeply and felt moved. I headed up the last stretch to the pagoda with a clear mind. And when I got to the very top I took in a sharp breath of air, admired the view with a wonderful feeling of accomplishment and felt deep down that this was a moment I was going to remember. One that meant something. The same ball of thought from the big Buddha was still rolling, I could feel it, but I didn't know where it was going to end up. Only now, that thought didn't seem quite as scary.*

*I was right, of course. About that moment meaning something. Although maybe that was inherent by the very design of having thought that in the first place.* After the temple and the national park I headed back to Taipei, enjoyed some final days of markets, hot springs and jazz before boarding my flight to Beijing. There I stayed in a rundown hostel in the old town, had numerous medical exams done, started exploring the city, moved into the dorm, attended my first classes, met my dorm mates and classmates and future friends and acquaintances. So much was hap, everything was new, a million doors were open and I wanted to take them all. And then, at some point, things settled down. I got used to translating everything and navigating the Chinese apps that dictated life there. I found some friends and we began to hang out frequently. Life in Beijing began to feel like life anywhere. Ups and downs included. And I began to grow restless again. This was still not as I had dreamt it all up.

*And one day while hanging my washing, I thought about that pagoda on the hill and that temple, about the Buddha and suffering and desire.* I thought about my time in university and on the farm and on the bike. *About the teaching of all the books and info signs and articles and everything else I had encountered at their most fundamental.* And then I thought about this restlessness growing within me. And my worlds *came crashing* together. *Because I realised, slowly then all at once, that I had been carrying around one craving so strong, so overwhelming, that it risked stealing almost all the contentedness I had ever built up:* My obsession with this idealised community. The quest I had been on since I was 18 years of age to find myself within such a community, and the constant, almost frantic at times, scheming, plotting and dreaming I engaged in to get there, always aware of how where I was didn't quite stack up. And all the more devastating, this realisation paved the way for the next one. And with the force of a truck it struck me, that through all this indelible craving disguised as dreaming I had become consistently blind to the incredible communities I had actually found myself in. First in Dublin and then Berlin (not to mention Budapest, Barcelona, Madrid and so many other places along the way), I had been surrounded by the most incredible, loving, caring and enriching communities imaginable. Made up of real people, not dreams and fantasies. But too often I had only cherished them properly in retrospect. Only when I was reminiscing on bygone days, and the communities themselves were conveniently once again out of reach, did I truly value them for what they were. By then, though, they were something to crave, not something in front of me, to be cherished and participated in and given back to and slowly improved. *In one of the most central aspects of my life, I had fallen for precisely the trap of desire becoming the root of suffering, which all those Buddhist teachings had tried to warn me about.* It was the type of realisation that at another time in my life could easily have knocked me out, sent me into a spiral of self loathing, which only serve to reinforce the problem itself as the monumentality and inescapability of my perceived failings mounted.

But I didn't spiral. *I laughed.* It was objectively pretty funny, I felt. *The kind of cosmic prank we play on ourselves.* The sort of overconfident blind sighting to our own flaws that is so fundamentally human. The fundamental tendency to hear what we want to hear in the ideas and philosophies we encounter*. In Buddhism, I had seen an antidote to desire and insecurity.* In the Commune I had seen a chance to revel in the joys of community forever. And in both I had seen a tool for the struggle against the all-consuming force of Capitalism. *And a way out of the cycle of craving and consumption*. And in many ways they do provide this. But not exclusively, not entirely, and certainly not straightforwardly in precisely in the ways I have dreamed up. 

*I suppose in my desire for quick fixes, for definitive answers to huge and pressing problems and for skirting some of the truly hard internal work involved in enlightenment I perhaps overly focused overly on externalising the teachings I encountered. Noting failings in society and their undeniable impact on myself and others, instead of making the difficult final steps in taking stock of my own shortcomings. And in doing so, I often failed to simply read and process some of the actual ideas right in front of me. Failed to truly and fully apply their most basic meaning to my own predicaments. Failed, in the end, to notice one of the subtle ways I was undermining my own happiness.*

*None of this is to say that I actually managed to learn nothing from my forays into these traditions. Indeed, quite the opposite, I owe them so much of the contentedness I have already carved out for myself in life. And to be fair, though I sound dramatically scornful now, the truth is I was actually usually pretty good at enjoying the places I’ve been in and the people I’ve spent time with along the way. It's just one of those fun reminders that there's always so much more to learn. If it's not abundantly clear already, though they influence my thinking a lot, I know only vanishingly little about even the small slice of all the teachings I have encountered so far.*

What I feel I can take away is this: there is a subtle distinction between yearning and craving. And that's tough. Because one is essential for life, and the other is a trap which saps all your happiness. To contribute to and live in a caring community is a dream I will always carry and work towards. But the fact I need to acknowledge is that when it does come about, it will be nothing like the fantasy that has been knocking about in my head for the past 8 years. And that is fine. In fact, that is great. Not knowing how things will go is one of the chief joys of life. And to me the difference between yearning and craving is in the acceptance and appreciation of this fact. Indeed, the joy should always be in the process, in the striving itself. In the here and now. Because that is all there is. There is no end product we are entitled to.

So now, when I find myself dreaming about moving to Freiburg into an 8 person shared apartment, or giving Berkeley another shot for my PhD, or going back to Dublin to start something, or wherever else my mind has chosen as the Eden of the week, where I am convinced the idealised community will finally fall into place, all I can do is pause and laugh. Because I know that once I do arrive, there will be a million excuses as to why it's just not quite perfect. But also, perhaps even more so, because I know that if I did move to any of these places I would have an incredible time, meet incredible people and find a caring community. *The paradise I have been seeking was never a place I could go, but something within myself, and those around me*. Far from unachievable, it has actually always been there already. I just need to keep practicing the art of seeing it and tending to it.

To continue training and trying my best at what I’ve actually known all along:   
To be contented, patient, humble, grateful, honest, kind and self-less.  
To always strive for better.  
And to maintain my constant goofy-smiled bathroom dance of appreciation for the universe as I go.