# On Home, Memory, ADEAEN and Narratives

*It wouldn't be like me to be found sitting in a bar with a lit cigarette and sombre jazz, staring out into the world alone and pondering my next step.*   
*And that bothers me. I don’t know why exactly it does, but it does. I suspect I've been reading too many novels. The ones where people leave such brooding sessions with purpose and clarity. With a lead or a suspect or a friend or a decision. Maybe those things are what I am really craving, and the brooding is just a way to get there. Regardless, I like people too much for brooding alone, and I am seldom willing to pay the price for a solitary drink to complete the look. I don’t smoke, either. An expensive habit, that, and I was never great at making money, nor at hanging onto it when I did. And yet here I am. With a drink. With the jazz. Without the cigarette. Sat in a bar. Staring pensively and waiting for a direction. Waiting for some continuation of the impulse that brought me here in the first place. Waiting for the next step, the call to action, the something that is utterly unignorable and will tug on my mind incessantly until I go and sort it out. It’s not coming, though. I stare out at the people around me, and they are just living their own lives. Smiling and laughing with friends, sharing conversations not meant for my ears as in a language I don’t understand. I am no protagonist. Their stories do not involve me.*  
*I sip my drink slowly to bide time, trying my best to ignore my phone. The magical device where all my actual story hooks reside. The emails and messages and everyday adventures that beckon with their flashy notifications. The rest of my life. Not contained in this bar nor in my head. Of course, contained within that phone is also a propensity to self-destruct for me. An addictive appeal I feel I have only ever temporarily kicked. So I leave the phone sitting. But my finger is twitching, and I keep looking at the door.*  
*I am really not that good at brooding. And that bothers me.*

Passages like that spring into my mind often, partially formed, expanding as they go. Sometimes they are true. Or, at least they happen, before or after I write them. Usually not though. It doesn't matter either way, the facts are only tangential, and the audience is just me. An involuntary mental exercise in narration. Sometimes those impulsive snippets even help with the writing process, inspiration or motivation or something like that. Usually not though. Usually, they are purposeless outside their temporary existence. But they spring into my mind anyways. And they spring into my mind a lot.

And whenever I am particularly deep in a novel, such mental word vomit will take on its style almost exactly. If the author has a particularly unique cadence, it will slip into my general internal dialogue and daydreams too. It's one of the most fun parts of the whole thing, really. Narrating my life as if it was written by someone else. As if it was itself a novel. It just means that if I ever do write fiction, I should make sure to be reading at least 10 authors at once to avoid outright imitation. Plagiarism on the aggregate is called inspiration I believe.

But this piece is not about writing. <a href="previews/OWAO.md" class="expand-essay">I've written enough about that already.</a> This is about something I talk and think about even more. It's about my future. And it's about the past too. And about narratives. And making decisions. But mostly it's about the future. And what the hell I plan to do with it. Because I have a problem, you see. A real problem. And it's related to those little monologues that pop into my mind every once in a while. Everything is connected. I don’t just write things for the sake of it, I swear.  
   
The problem is this: I narrativise too much. Or too little. Or some perfectly fucked up mix that ensures I am completely unable to make decisions. I have neither scientific clarity nor steadfast conviction. Or to put it in another way, I often make the passive decision, the one that requires neither the conviction nor the clarity. I miss the trees for the forest and the forest for the trees.

And I'm sure that all doesn't make a whole lot of sense. So let me try to explain. As long as I can remember, I have loved telling stories. True stories mostly, in the Irish sense of the phrase. But in the Irish sense, as I understand it, the facts are not all too important. No, what matters is the sentiment, the feeling, the ***narrative***. And that's what I really love, a good narrative. If I were a painter that would be my easel. Or maybe my paint, or maybe my brush, I'm not sure yet. Regardless, I adore spinning out such narratives like a weaver of ideas, and if I do say so myself, I am quite good at it.

Which of course means I love a good campfire circle, playing Dungeons and Dragons and telling bedtime stories to kids. But it also extends to many places other than the obvious. I mean, if you are good at something, you might as well roll with it. So I spin my narratives in their natural habitat in written pieces and over pints in the pub, and I also spin them in presentations and in interviews and in essays and when giving friends advice. And, most critically to all of this, I spin narratives within my own mind. To explain and to understand and to categorise and to reflect. They are countless and core to who I am. And in the way that narratives are, none of them are really true and all of them are somewhat true. And that's fine mostly. Gives life some spice and makes for some decent introspection.

But sometimes it's not so fine. Especially when there is a big decision to be made. A decision which requires clarity and calculation, comparing ideas and plans and trading them off. A decision with a time limit. Where copping out and playing both sides is not an option. The kind of decision I seem to be facing a lot recently. Decisions, in short, that feel like they require some hard facts to be made. 

So I sit down and go to my mind to find some such facts. And in that messy brain of mine I find some lovely memories and information that perfectly fit the bill. Even better, neatly packaged next to them, I find some lovely narratives. Some stories that sum the information and memories up and make it much easier to understand. So I use those narratives to go off and make the decision. So far so good, I would say. But one day something happens, and that particular narrative falls apart. The infinite complexity of the world keeps every narrative vulnerable to enough scrutiny. On inspection, things can rarely be summed up succinctly and neatly and definitively. And that’s fine. Maybe I just need to make a new decision, now that I’ve learned that old premise was wrong. Go back to the facts and figure things out for real. Craft a new narrative perhaps, a better one, more refined and robust.

So I start to sift through my mind again and I realise something terrifying. There aren’t really any facts in there at all. The more I dig for them, the more layers of narrative I find. All my memories, in truth, are tangled, unbelievably tangled, in these half-truth half-fiction grand narratives I've woven. Everything up there in my brain is. Even the facts in front of my eyes get parsed, quickly and efficiently through the narrativisation machine to their best match, or become part of a whole new story themselves. And when I look externally for some concrete markers, I realise everything out there comes packaged in narratives too; the personal narratives of others and the collective narrative, ideologies and beliefs of society. And even where there is some degree of objective truth to be found, by the time my brain has chewed it up for processing it has become unbelievably tangled too.

So I can’t possibly be objective about my memories. And on the other hand, I can’t be steadfastly unobjective, either. My curiosity simply won’t allow me to just swallow one narrative whole and make it my everything.  I have absorbed the narrative of eternal scepticism far too deeply for that. And rightly so, I think. The last thing I want to do is remain stagnant or obstinate in outdated, false or harmful ways. But this does leave me without the anchor of a grand narrative to explain away everything with absolute certainty. There is no comfort for me in one of those all-encompassing systems of beliefs that gives everything place and purpose.

And so I am stuck. With no basis, real or imagined, to move forward. Or at least, that’s how it often feels. It’s not completely true, of course. Just another narrative. But it’s real enough to stop me acting decisively about my future. To leave me paralysed and melancholy and wishing I could just believe in something. Just make a damn decision. Especially regarding the choices I am facing at the moment. The big ones. They are, I suppose, **the** ones. The questions of what I want my life to look like and what I am going to do to make that happen. Or to be a little less dramatic, the more immediate questions of what I want to do next in life, and where I want to live while doing it. Of how I am going to sustainably get by and whether to stay put, keep moving or go home. And to figure those questions out, I have to untangle some of the most sprawling, complex and interwoven narratives I have.

So let's start with one of the most beautiful and detailed narrative tapestries I personally know. An archetypical example of the genre really: the narrative about travel, about ADAEAN and about life on the road. One so old that I couldn’t tell you for sure when it even appeared in my life, but it was definitely very early on. In truth it's probably one I inherited, from my parents and their parents before them. A blessing, I must say, as from my childhood to now this particular obsession has brought me many of the most eye-opening and incredible experiences of my lifetime. It is cliched to say travel has changed me totally, opened my heart to the world and humbled me to my core. But it is absolutely true. I have been so very privileged to have had the opportunity and money to visit so many places, and even luckier to have the time and support to go on longer expeditions for months at a time. 

And at some point in the early stages of realising all this, 18 years of age and on my first ever (kind-of) solo trip, desperately hungover and lying in a bunk bed in a giant tent, I made a promise to myself, [to travel the world without flying](https://universityobserver.ie/around-the-world-in-80-ways/) and interview people along the way. It was an idea that came to me first only as a title: “A Documentary About Everything And Nothing” (ADEAEN), and has since transformed into an obsession with few parallels in my life. And it is a project I have now sunk countless hours into, with 16 countries visited by bicycle, 62 amazing interviews recorded and hundred of hours of footage of the adventures experienced on the way. 

I have adored every moment of making it so far. The beauties of slow travel and the incredible people I have met, the majesties of nature and culture and all the accidental adventures and serendipitous circumstances. In truth, it’s hard to think of times I have felt more alive than with my life on my bike and the world around me, pushing my physical limits everyday and being rewarded with the majesty of the world for my efforts.

I suppose this narrative is also twisted in with the dream of being a writer and of making things. Of finding a sustainable way to make money travelling forever. Or to just find a sustainable way to make money making art generally. Because I have noticed that even if I am writing about home or stillness or simplicity, nothing seems to get my mind engaging with the world around me and spinning words quite like being on the road. There are some harsh realities to acknowledge here too though. ADAEAN, in its nascent form anyways, sits more or less ready to go. I have so many recordings of my attempts so far, so many accompanying thoughts and stories to tell, and so many interviews to bring it all together. And yet, I've never found the time to edit any of it. For all the talk, I've never actually made anything watchable. Not even a proof of concept. Just an ever-growing collection of neatly tagged and arranged recordings and grandiose thoughts about what they might one day become.   
Some part of me stubbornly believes that I simply will get around to editing it all together one day, once the adventure is done. But perhaps more importantly, even if I don’t, the joy in ADAEAN has always been in the process. Despite no documentary to show for it, I do not regret a second of the time I have invested into the idea so far. Every day trundling across parts of the world I would otherwise never have seen has been infinitely rewarding in it's own right. And I can only imagine more growth, wonder and all the things I truly value in life from finishing the process. I can truly imagine nothing that is more *me*, than seeing the world by bike, boat and thumb, and talking to as many people as I can along the way. And when I think about all that, wrapped up in this narrative, it seems obvious that my next step in life should be to save up and get out on the road with my camera and my notebook. To live out this dream to the fullest before the relentless march of time, PhDs, commitments and real jobs make the huge time investment required by overland travel infeasible.

But there’s another huge and relevant narrative in my life too. Tangled with the former and making everything more complicated. This one is about home, about Dublin, about community and about staying still. Because while I love life on the road, it can absolutely feel like a cage too. I remember on my first attempt at the ADAEAN dream, when things weren't quite going to plan and I was resting up at my friend Kia’s house in Freiburg. We were scheming for the Spring, when I was going to to cycle as far as China, with Kai joining as far as Kyrgyzstan. On some level I was excited, especially at the prospect of not having to cycle it all alone. But I was also filled with a deep, existential sadness. A feeling of lack of purpose and of loneliness so deep down it made everything else feel a bit bland.

And then I made a realisation. We weren't leaving until March, and it wasn't looking likely I would get a job before January. I had a month to kill and I didn't *have* to cycle anywhere. In fact, it dawned on me slowly, then all at once, I could go home. I was jubilant within minutes of the realisation. Dancing around Kai's bedroom in celebration, I realised just how tired I had become. I didn't want to be broadening my horizons, wild camping alone or crashing on random couches. I just wanted to go home, to be surrounded by people I loved and to live a bit more simply for a bit. As it still often does now, Ireland was beckoning to me like a lighthouse in the dark. An old friend with a cup of tea and a warm embrace, waiting for my wild days to be over, and happy to forgive me for them.

I suppose I could attribute the feeling to faraway fields and their greenness, seeing as it mostly emerges precisely after a long time on the road. But I think there is more to it. To be specific: I think it’s nice to have somewhere to call home. Somewhere you feel safe and centered. And too much time on the road, for me at least, leaves me longing for such a place. I’ve realised also recently, that many of my happiest moments are quite simple in nature. Whether it is playing a board games, going on hikes, dancing around the living room or just sitting around and chatting, when surrounded by good people and connection, it really doesn't take much to make me truly ecstatically happy. Like laugh-until-you-cry-god-what-a-wonderful-life-we-live-everything-is-going-to-be-good-forever kind of happy. And all this begs an important question: why go through all the effort? The travel dream is, realistically, quite a time-intensive, expensive, indulgent and even draining activity. So why do I feel the need to do it? And especially, why do I feel I need to commit what would be at least two years of my life into this fanciful circumnavigation attempt I dreamed up? If I will only end up longing for home anyway, why not stay in one place long enough to build up that feeling sustainably. No need to abandon the amazing adventures entirely, just to keep them as fun, occasional escapades, in an otherwise stable and settled life. Which, in turn, would give me the time to finally get serious about the other great dream of my life so far: that of living in and contributing to a community with purpose.

You see, for a long time, as with most others I respect, I have felt the world to be a horrifyingly unfair and unequal place. And I have felt a moral obligation to do something about it, or at the very least to try. A feeling all the more pressing when I consider just how nice of a run of things I have had. And though it is a lofty goal in the abstract, and the world is an infinitely complex and unpredictable place, I know there is more I could and should be doing. And as much as I’d like to believe this more can be achieved by reading books and pontificating over pints, I am more sure now than ever before that change requires a village, a collective or a community. Things which, in turn, require time, trust and commitment. All of which is much more compatible with a settled life than one on the road.  
	  
And so, no matter where I am in the world, <a href="previews/OCCBP.md" class="expand-essay">I carry with me this dream of a community</a>, one within which I could do better. Most often it looks like a commune in the countryside. Surrounded by friends and family, minimising our ecological footprint and providing space for radicals of all forms to organise. Gathering in the evenings to share food, stories and resources and stave off the frightful feeling of loneliness together. And yes, as many of my close friends have found so very humorous since I was 16 years old, in this dream I have <a href="previews/OLP.md" class="expand-essay">found someone to share my life with</a>, and with whom to raise kids. And so those kids run around this commune of my dreams, playing and building and exploring and learning and eventually repeating the cycle. Growing up to think for themselves and criticise where my beliefs went wrong, and making their world better in turn. 

And with this dream in mind I can't help but think that it's time to put aside my stubborn demand for boundless novelty and build a meaningful life of actual resilient contentedness. To keep plenty of spontaneity in my life but give up this notion that there is anything I need to run from. To stay put somewhere and really give it my all to build something with people I love, whatever form that ends up taking. Short term I suppose this might look like getting a stable job I like which somehow makes the world a better place, or maybe speeding up the PhD pipeline. But most importantly, it means finding, learning from and contributing to communities and spaces who are already making the world a better place right now. And joining them long enough to make an impact myself. And once again, writing that all out, the case feels fairly open and shut. Clearly I should stay somewhere. The opportunity is just too great not to try. The thought that I might finally be ready excites me to my core. To stay put, live simply, give back and be content. What a wonderful life.

But then I consider locking it in for sure. And suddenly it doesn't seem so simple. Didn't I already spend my first 22 years on this planet mostly in the same place, yearning to be somewhere else? Doesn’t being in one place not often lead me to falling down holes of procrastination and apathy? Is it not the case that what attracted me to slowly cycling across our planet in the first place was the feeling that I can't really help the world if I don't understand it. That travel has consistently radicalised and catalysed me into action, and reminded me, in that all so important visceral way, that I know almost nothing. That my slice of experience is but a narrow one, everything is contextual and there is always more to learn from others, regardless of what I think I already know. Not to mention that it’s been precisely through travel that I encountered the real examples of radical communities which gave that dream form.

I could go on and on like this. Back and forth. Two beautiful narratives battling it out. The world-travelling suck-the-marrow-out-of life Killian and the find beauty in the everyday and the build something that will last Killian. And I honestly can’t tell you which one I am. Sometimes one feels right, and sometimes the other feels right, and usually I feel like some mix. Obviously the truth is in the middle, the truth is that both are me, and that is amazing. But the problem remains of how to make choices as two fundamentally contradictory people? How do you find balance in two stories that negate each other.

Don’t get me wrong, I would love to live out both to their fullest. My parents laugh, often, at my tendency to want to have my cake and eat it too. I am perpetually trying to have it all. And it’s not hard to apply their logic here. Because living out these grand narratives, really going all in and achieving the dreams they imply. Well that takes time. I’m young, in some ways there is plenty of time, sure. But it is not infinite, and these are both very big dreams. The fact is I probably can’t do both. Not 100%. Certainly, I can’t do both next year. In the near term, at the very least, I have to focus my efforts somewhere. But every time I think about shelving one of these dreams, one of these me’s, even temporarily, my heart races, and I am right back to thinking it’s the other that really needs to go. And so I am completely incapable of making a decision. Of going all in on or the other of these narratives and making it my reality.

It doesn’t end there, either, because there are so many other narratives too. Scattered throughout this essay and contained within each other. And countless more that have gone unwritten. I’m not going to waste your time expounding upon them all. If you’ve made it this far, I think you’ve had plenty of my internal monologue for now. And I imagine your brain is filled up with plenty of your own lovely narratives too. But they are almost all here, in case you are curious. Scattered, visibly and not-so-visibly, in expansive essay form. Whether you are me in the future, or anyone else I have shared this with, and you do decide to delve in, I hope they bring some sort of value. <a href="previews/ORTTYAR.md" class="expand-essay">Because while this may have begun as a series of essays directed at myself, for rebuilding when in need of a reset,</a> it is undeniable that I have once again used this opportunity to write as a conduit to figure my current self out more than anything else. I suppose that was the real point regardless.

So let's conclude. Let's wrap this all up into a neat narrative and call it a day. This problem of narratives is a thorny one, I’ll admit it. And perhaps I am just fated to be stuck bouncing between them, never truly landing anywhere. But there is one narrative I have that bucks the trend. One beautiful, all encompassing narrative that solves all these problems. And it goes a little something like this:  
Have your cake, and eat it too. Bake another, and eat that one as well. Or better yet, share it out. Bake a third and start a food fight. This is it. There is no second attempt at life. If you want to experience it, then this is your one shot. By no means be greedy, or step on the toes of others to get ahead. But by god don’t let the need to be consistent get in the way of the need to live, to experience. To try things and be wrong. And to try again. To hold all the opposing thoughts simultaneously in a superposition. To let each narrative be just that: a narrative, no more and no less. A lens to be put on when needed to help interpret the world and your place in it. Which can just as quickly be set aside to prevent it from clouding judgement or stealing joy.

The fact is, all these grand narratives are far better at justifying decisions already made than helping make them in the moment. In recovering meaning in retrospect from a life that is fundamentally chaos and chance. The goal, you must remember, has never been to live a life where you made all the best decisions. The goal is to live a good life and to help others do the same. To step back from the needs of the now and focus on something bigger. And I must say, having some nice stories about you, your past, your future, and how it all just makes sense, fits together and just had to be, is a pretty fantastic way to make that happen. Or at the very least, surely it can’t hurt.

And when it comes to making decisions. Well, the thing is, just make them. There are infinite possibilities. It’s insane really to think you can ever really know where a big change will take you. So sure, use some narratives, use some logic, seek some advice and use some intuition. But at the end of the day, it’s probably best just to follow your nose and your heart. And that, by design, is a nonsensical statement that can mean whatever you need it to mean in the moment.

Oh, and by the way, the story ends like <a id="ending-switch" href="#">**this**</a>: