# On Love and Polyamory

The truth is that I do not write on this topic because it scares me. That is to say, I do not write with any definitive clarity on this topic because it scares me. Which is to say this topic fills pages beyond measure in my personal journal and makes up many a long conversation with close friends, and yet rarely graces the pages of anything I intend to reread, refine or give any probability of being seen by others, because that scares me. Which means I can vent it all out when I need to, without committing too much to anything I actually write, philosophically at least. A learned evasiveness to avoid the pain and guilt of specificity. An undercurrent of my love life since my second ever girlfriend kissed someone else while I was on a weekend trip away with my parents at 19\. Which came with a fear of commitment so extensive I couldn't even commit to a specific form of non-commitment.

A state of mind which has seen me dabble in open relationships, intense flings, polyamory, relationship anarchy, quasi-monogamy and recreational sleeping around across countless countries and changes in the turbulent last 5 years of my life. And a current which, it feels, has come crashing up against a mountain somewhere in the last 2 months, as I took a breath and a step towards figuring out what it is I actually want out of life, and love, in the next years of my time on this planet.

But don't get me wrong. This essay is not a lament about years wasted. Nor is it about how I was somehow misguided in the past five years. Quite the opposite, in fact. This is an ode to time well spent and people I am glad to have spent it with, with a long-overdue stock take, of where it has all mentally left me.

 Because despite a genesis in unfortunate circumstances, my experimentations in non-monogamy have undeniably been directly responsible for many of the most intense connections, experiences, and chances for self discovery I have come across in my entire life. And for that I feel incredibly grateful. One thing I definitely know: I love love. I love loving. And I love being loved. So I suppose it's high time I figure out what all that and all this actually means to me.

And I suppose it makes sense to start somewhere on the polyamory-open relationship continuum. Because it's that idea which was the undercurrent for all of this. And the reason I choose the end of my short-lived second college relationship as a boundary marker for this era. Because in an offhand comment/ desperate plea to figure things out in an otherwise quite definitive and amicable end after her actions, she planted an idea in me. And so as I licked my wounds and the blow to my ego of her cheating, I pondered how it was really the short-sightedness and stupidity of the betrayal and not the act itself which got to me in the first place. And, as a naturally flirty person with an endless desire for the affirmation of mutual attraction, I began to imagine how I might enjoy it, to get to indulge in such joys while holding down a steady relationship, with the connection and safety that implied. And so, with a year of on and off lockdown, some reddit threads and YouTube videos, I was somewhere around the point of completely dismissing it all out of hand, with an unshakeable itch that wanted to give it a try by the time I started dating again.

So, of course, when I found myself falling for someone next, in the spring of 2021, I impulsively told her I wasn’t really looking for monogamous commitment, and after a period of non-committal dating, we instead decided to navigate an open relationship. And only two and a half years thereafter, I would find myself falling for people precisely because of their Polyamorous identity, and the common vocabulary and understanding I felt that implied. Meaning, to my mind at least, that I went from an outsider to an integrated member of the world of non-monogamy in what seemed like a shockingly short time. And yet, I never called myself polyamorous. Or a non-monogamist. Or a relationship anarchist. Or any of the other labels one might adopt.

Non-monogamy was, to me, a beautiful, affirming, revolutionary and constantly enlightening mode of loving. And yet it was one I undeniably never quite felt fully at home in. Which was fine. I knew others who felt the same, and still held down positive polyamorous relationships. It was simply something we did, not something we were. And yet, it begged a question. Because if it was only something I did, and not something I was, then I could just as easily not do it. And every once in a while when the question did surface, demanding to be answered, I found I never quite had a satisfying answer to it. I was never quite able to put it to rest, and put it aside. To pick a goddamn side and stick to it. So let me return to the question definitively now, with some hindsight and some growth and some changes in perspective and priorities. To monogamy or to non-monogamy, that is the question.

And at the centre of the debate, I think two questions always emerged for me:  
Can I do it?  
And do I want to?

The first I have to distinguish heavily from the ‘Can it be done’ question that so many people seem to lean into when this topic is discussed online and in person. I have no reason to doubt all the lovely people I know who say it works for them. Nor is it hard for me to say that there have been times I felt it worked for me. And at the same time, I absolutely believe many others when they say that they could never. There are different strokes for different folks, and it always annoyed me in the discourse when people on both sides of the debate resorted to calling the other insecure instead of accepting that what works for one might not work for another. Ironically, I seldom felt more committed to either monogamy or polyamory than when some person, online or real, was trying to convince me the other one they didn't do was fake or horrible or impossible or not real love or whatever else.  
But that’s beside the point. The point is, given I believe polyamory is possible generally, is it possible for me? And were the times I felt fundamentally incompatible with it just cries of an ultimately temporary pain, or were they moments of clarity which I should not ignore? Because this non-monogamy stuff is risky business. Jealousy is real, and it is a fucking piece of shit. And the more you feel for someone the worse it can feel when they go spend time and have sex with someone else. But I have to say, for me at least, that it really is true that when I work on myself and am feeling good, confident and have trust and communication with my partner and good boundaries, it pretty much works for me. I have undeniably been in shit situations through non-monogamy, ones I would not ever wish to repeat. But they always felt more downstream of inexperience and mistakes than any fundamental incompatibility. The possibility always exists that I am deluding myself, or short-sighted in my impact evaluations. And I don’t know if I would ever be able to or want to completely stomp out the part of me that questions it all occasionally. But overall it does seem, from the evidence I have gathered so far, that I can craft a non-monogamous relationship to be one which is not only not painful for me, but actively insanely enjoyable. So yes, I can indeed do it.

Which makes the second question all the more important. Assuming there is a pathway to healthy polyamory for me, the question remains if I want to take it, and just as importantly, why I want to take it. Because make no mistake, the conclusion to my explorations have not just been solely that it is possible for me, but that it is possible precisely through mutual understanding, clear boundaries, open communication, self-knowledge, reflection, a willingness to sit with discomfort and to learn and grow. And those things are fucking hard work. And when I was reading Polysecure, and all the stories of happy non-monogamous couples contained within, I couldn't help but think to myself: God, that sounds like a whole lot of effort. And undeniably, it is. So the question remains: why do I want to do this hard work? What is in it for me and those I love?  
	Of course, one answer comes easily. And that is that dating people is fun. That meeting and exploring someone with almost no boundaries on flirting or sexuality or where you can take things is a thrilling, intoxicating experience, and one I personally absolutely love. And that non-monogamy gives an amazing vocabulary and framework for doing it ethically and without deception. There are simply so many beautiful, crazy souls out there that I would love to meet and explore and open up to without restriction. And that, trivial or hedonistic as it may seem, was often all the justification I really needed.  
Because undeniably, sometimes it's about the confidence from flirting and dating and sex. But it's also about learning and adoring small quirks of someone you have been on a few dates with, or lying in bed with someone after great sex and discussing your love lives truly freely and honestly, not worrying that any thought is taboo. It's about being able to treat and explore sex and sexuality as an unbelievable collective and individual gift, and something that can mean everything and nothing, and to return at the end of it to someone with welcoming arms and your long term interests at heart. And about the undeniable flood of endorphins from mashing your body together with a close friend or someone you only recently met, not just because you are horny or need validation but as an ultimately intense way of telling them: you are cool and sexy, and I trust you, though I may only barely know you. It’s that feeling of euphoria when things are working, everyone is content, and you step back and look at the web of unconventional romantic, sexual and other connections and feel pride. And know, precisely because the connections are weird and defy conventions that you chose and sculpted them, not how anyone prescribed, but how you, and the others involved wanted them to be. And with all that on paper, it's not hard to remember the allure of it all, and to hope I can find a way to keep the freedom for all that exploration and joy into the future. An open and shut case, it seems.

But I've glossed over something here. Something important. In that theoretical treatment of polyamory I have pretty much left out the real why or why not. The \-amory. The love. The thing that really makes it all worthwhile. And I have left out the who too. Deliberately so. Because while those other words may be difficult to write, and to commit to the quasi-eternity of an edited essay, these next words I once found hard to even say.

Because sometime in December of 2021 I lay in bed next to my girlfriend at the time and I looked at her. It was a cold winter morning, and we were cuddled up close. And I was hit with a feeling unlike any I had experienced. A desire to be one with her. To just drop everything and have babies or ride off into the sunset or fuse our souls together or whatever it is that movie couples do. To cease living as one person with desires and dreams and things he needs, but instead as two. Or maybe even more. To, putting it short and clichéd, become a family with this person, and take on the world together. It was a wonderful, magical feeling, and it was absolutely earned on her end, the result of an intense, mutual opening up and building of trust, communication and sharing of lives we were undertaking at the time. It was, I think, the feeling that people sing and write so much about, if I may be so bold as to universalise. I was in love. Or, more specifically, I had once again redefined my understanding of those words to be that height which I was currently experiencing.

And that moment lingered and took shape into a force in me that would never leave. A love for her that I think I will always carry with me. And a lesson, in just what that L word can be all about. And so even now, no longer with her for almost two years, when someone asks me if I have ever been in love, or how you know you love someone, I can't help but think of that moment. It stands, immortalised and undeniably romanticised in my brain's ceaseless narrativisation of life, as an archetype of the height of feeling it unlocked. And also as a reminder of what I lost, and of what made the unravelling of that relationship so particularly painful.

Because the chemical cocktail of wonderland wore off some time that morning, and the individual crept back in. She and I didn't drop everything and have kids. And I don't think either of us would have wanted to. Instead, she moved to Hong Kong for an exchange, and we opened our relationship for the second and final time. She crossed some serious boundaries of mine, and I used my hurt in the aftermath to carve out an undeniably uneven relationship. And I found out that no defence mechanism, especially not an open relationship, helps when you feel betrayed by someone you love. We had difficult conversations, reconciled and loved each other once again. But there was nothing I could say, when she admitted through tears in a bar in Thailand, that I just didn’t speak about us in the same way any more. Something was undeniably lost.

We travelled to Spain together, and I told her I wanted to break up when summer ended, for practical reasons. She was due back in college. And I wanted to cycle around the world, alone. We spent that Summer together, and made more incredible memories, and at each junction I looked at her and wondered if it had always been destined to end, or whether I had made a catastrophic error. There was a tearful breakup, and we passed Autumn going our separate ways while sending voice messages that included the phrase ‘I Love you’ far more than messages between two exes should. And in Winter, when my mission to cycle around the world faltered and loneliness struck deeper than ever before, I began writing her a letter. A letter I would rewrite and reread many times, meandering along icy roads in an uncertain time. A letter she would read and we would call about. And a week later I would be showing up in Ireland at her doorstep with everything but a boom box. It was complicated, it was messy, we both clearly had our hang-ups, but we decided to give things another shot. Then it was nice again. I went to Prague, and she came to Berlin, and for a time we were happy. But we didn’t really talk. Not about the things we needed to talk about. And my tendency to be condescending and continued need for external validation, and her tendency to extract every drop of guilt from me without giving a solution or firm boundary, entered a death spiral they never recovered from.  
   
And so, a few days after Valentine's Day 2023, we broke up again. It was nothing personal. It just didn't make sense any more. We weren't making each other happy. I did the rational thing, curled up into a ball for the rest of the month, and then set out on a 4000km bike trip across most of Europe, wild camping and reading philosophy and annoying my partner in crime for the adventure with my admittedly uneven recovery. And that was it.

And I have written all this out. To get it off my chest, sure. But also because it matters. Because every detail of that story has rippled through the decisions I made during and since. And because there are still days when I miss her, as insane as it feels to admit that. But most importantly because I have recently realised that in all that chaos I lost something. Some innocence. Some belief that no one is out to hurt me, and that even if they end up doing so incidentally, it does not imply some irredeemably broken tendency in either of us. I lost, in short, the carefree, forgiving and optimistic world-view I try to cultivate in all other aspects of my life, in precisely the area where it might matter most. And with that, I lost something even more precious. An idea, feeling and mantra that was once close to my heart. That of unconditional love.

	The absolute intoxication of wanting to give yourself over to someone else entirely, and make plans as a unit instead of alone. The undeniable escapism of it all, abdicating your own dreams and desires for a collective vision. The ideal of unconditional love that exploded into my thoughts during the honeymoon phase of that very relationship. The one, I think, that made me look at her in just that way on that particular morning. The idea of just picking someone, someone great, someone beautiful, someone inspiring, and making it work. Of looking them in the eyes and telling them with your entire god-damn soul that you will **always** be there for them, if they’ll always be there for you. A form of love, a philosophy of life and an act of commitment I once considered the highest honour possible, both to give and to receive. And yet, one which I now realise I kept only academically but without soul for most of 2022, and had lost completely by 2023\. And I can’t help but wonder if it might not be her I miss, but the feeling of such a love generally. And the philosophy which accompanies it, which I once held up as the pinnacle of loving, and have since relegated to a theoretical daydream.

To bring it all back around, it's that very ideal of love that I have found to be undeniably incompatible with Non-monogamy. For me at least. Because it's tough to maintain a pure, unconditional love at the best of times. And when everything is in flux, when new people come and go, feelings change naturally with circumstance and commitment just can’t really be guaranteed, well it feels damn near impossible. And I know that first hand. I am just out of an amazing polyamorous relationship. I loved her, I absolutely did. She was incredible and dynamic and caring and taught me so much about love and loving. Lessons I wouldn’t have been able to write these words without. But I came up against a wall. Against a self-imposed barrier where I limited my love and just couldn’t push through out of fear or form. And so I let it be. And I forgot, on the level of really knowing, that there was something I had lost at all. But every once in a while it came up. Like when I realised I had stopped doing one of the things I once loved the most: planning a future together. I told myself it was early days, or she didn’t want kids, or she still had some of her own shit to figure out. But I think on some level I knew it was mainly because we were polyamorous. And some part of me recognised that diving into such turbulent waters with all I have and much I still need to work on, was just too dangerous to allow. And its that, that really makes me wonder whether I want to do this polyamory thing any more.

And that is where I am at. Single and unattached to any form of monogamy or non. Pensive, pondering, and increasingly aware that these past 5 years have unalterably shaped who I am. And that the decisions I make now will decide how the next 5 shape me in turn. I am grateful also, as I reflect and realise that the people I have entrusted with my love and intimacy in the last years have been such unbelievably caring, considerate and wonderful souls. And it gives me a strange joy to know they were probably also just figuring out this loving thing, same as me. 

And as I lay this all out, and wander the mountains of my mind and my travels, I am struck with a nice sense of calm. I simply don’t find myself buying into any of that old self-loathing or belief that I am unlovable or incapable of commitment any more. Quite the contrary, somewhere along this whole story, between all the people who genuinely gave me a slice of their love, and hard and slow self-work, I think I was finally able to all but put to rest a good chunk of my cumulative teenage and college insecurity in this realm. The wave from five years ago has crashed, and I can say now, with more conviction than ever before, that I really do love myself. And what's more, I have remembered, in a way that counts, about unconditional love, and what it once meant to me. I guess now I just have to take the next step. But even with all this written out, I would be lying if I said I knew what that should be for sure.

The fact is that this loving thing is hard. And I undeniably have a lot to learn still. A lot more mistakes to make and lessons to learn the hard way. So I suppose this topic could just remain as one which fills the pages of my journal, and conversation with friends, and rarely appears anywhere else. Because I have no idea what I'm doing. I don’t know if anyone does. Who and how I love is perhaps one of the singularly most important choices I will ever make. How can you possible expect me to say with any definitive clarity that I know what I am doing, much less commit it to written words that people including myself might one day look back on and laugh at for their inaccuracies? No, it is much safer not to leave it all vague, keep the definitive statements to late night chats and my diary and call it a day.

	And I could end this here. I really could. Radically open and undetermined.  
But that would be falling right back into the old ways.  
So instead I will say this:  
I **do** know some things about love.  Not perhaps any sort of usable advice for anyone else. But things worth committing to paper for myself.  
I know that love is incredible.  
I know that caring for someone, really caring for someone, will always open me up to the potential for immense pain.  
I know to be truthful and to be kind because there is no other way.  
I know to follow my gut and my heart, with a healthy measure of brain when needed.  
I know to be forgiving, trusting and ultimately naive is to be truly brave.  
And I know that every single fucking second since I remembered the term unconditional love, it has gnawed at me like a rat in a lead bowl.

So fuck it. Who cares that it is a nuclear bomb with the power to destroy me emotionally once again. Who cares that some old people say real love should be measured and deliberate, not impulsive and emotional. Who cares that I was hurt before and coddled myself with never again. There is simply too much on the line not to try. And I am going to try with every bloody bone in my body and every muscle in my heart.  
And I am no longer scared to put that down in words.  
Now I just have to go out and try again.