# On Procrastination, Social Media, Anxiety and Loneliness

God I hate it. Being stuck like this. Feeling so fucking pathetic. Staring at my laptop or pile of clothes or some other assorted unfinished task I'm not even bothered to think up right now. Sitting here and thinking about how little I want to do whatever it is that has to be done. Or how I’m actually not capable of it. Or how there’s not enough time. Or some other reason why it is all irredeemably fucked.

And I know I'll feel better if I just do it. Really it's not that hard. I've done it so many times before. But. I. Just. Don't. Want. To. Do. It. And so I'm not. Like a child. Instead I am wasting my time away playing video games, watching YouTube or masturbating. Anything really that gives quick dopamine for little effort. Not that it matters, of course. Any dopamine I manage to squeeze out of my poor over and under-stimulated brain just gets dropped into the pit of self loathing anyway. Because it’s my fault I am sitting here. It’s my fault I am miserable. If I just did the thing, I could be out there living life. Doing things I enjoy. Things that matter. But instead, I am here. Wasting away.

And sometimes it's even worse than that. Sometimes it’s actually something important and unavoidable. There’s a real deadline looming, and I still just don’t want to work on it. I stare into the void as the time ticks away and I know the situation is only getting worse. But I just don't do the thing.

I have begun to realise there is something inherently self-destructive about this all too. That some part of me wants to be here, right on the edge of serious consequences. The idea being, I suppose, that I will either rise to the task spectacularly or fail miserably, horribly and with consequence. And thereby I will finally learn my lesson and not wind up here again. But neither happens. Not really. Eventually stress wins out over apathy, and I get busy in a rush of mania and a pit in my stomach. But I’ve got a music on in the background. And every small burst of work needs to be rewarded with a few minutes of watching <a href="previews/ORVBUIB.md" class="expand-essay">one of my comfort movies or shows</a> to stop me from shaking too much as the looming deadline leaves my nerves fried and the worst of my anxious tendencies on full display. I get through it all eventually though. The thing gets done. It is just much worse than it could have been and took much longer than it needed to.  

I have learned less, enjoyed the process less, and leave feeling utterly exhausted and small. Craving even more comfort; time alone spent watching more comfort content or mindless alcoholic evenings to refresh my mind. And it is usually exactly those things I turn to. Because this process also leaves my self-discipline and focus muscles unflexed and withered. I know intellectually that to get back on the right track would be sped along by the likes of <a href="previews/OCCBP.md" class="expand-essay">meditation</a>, exercise, nature and good conversation. But, in practice, the likelihood I seek out those things is close to none. Because how could I. I am so fucking stupid. It all could have been so much easier, but instead I fucked it. The effort of doing the task in the first place would have paled in comparison to all the mental blocks I erected around it. All I really had to do was do the thing. All the rest was self imposed and unnecessary. 

I think about the times when I did just do it. They were great. I had time for so many other activities. And sometimes, often even, the task itself was actually enjoyable. Because I didn't just sit around feeling sorry for myself and doing things I don't even really want to be doing. God, everything could have been so much better if I had just sat down and done the thing. What a miserable sack of shit I am.

And so the self-hatred cycle keeps spinning. As bad in retrospect as it was during the whole process. Now it is killing the beautiful feeling of freedom that the time after the deadline was supposed to entail. Instead of enjoying that it is done I am lamenting how useless I am. And worrying I will never get better. Which of course only makes me feel even worse about the whole cycle, and my own inadequacies. Until I have chipped away completely at the very confidence and self-belief that could have helped me to break the cycle in the first place. A mental deflation almost guaranteeing <a href="previews/OPSMAL.md" class="expand-essay">the cycle will repeat</a>.  

Of course, I am an eternally self-critical individual. Even when I cannot escape it, I recognise the cycle. I’ve been here, oh so many times. I know, from experience if not from theory, what makes it better and what makes it worse. And so I remember. I remember the one solution I have always found to work. I need to reset. I need to delete all the apps and head out into the woods for a few days. Go on a hike or a trip or just buy myself a flip phone and spend a week reading books. Even better if it is for a month. Even even better if it is for longer. I just need to go somewhere, anywhere, where I can take a breather and replenish my stocks of self-discipline and self-belief. Put myself through some difficulty and routine, for things that are immediate and make intuitive sense to me. Maybe a semester break is coming up. Or my time-to-quit bell is ringing as I work my job. Whatever it is, I just have to take the leap. To escape and reset and replenish. And off we go, back again.

I return to this document some time later, and I am on the other end of the spectrum. I am in or have just returned from a new environment. I am excited and motivated, and I want to do all the things. <a href="previews/OTDAATOTIDKAO.md" class="expand-essay">The spiral goes the other way</a>, and I want to work out and to read and to write and study and get things done. And of course it's not all easy. It still takes energy to sit down and do it. And I still occasionally succumb to melancholia and apathy and the cycle. But the bursts are short and self-contained. 

I haven’t forgotten of course. The specter of apathy lingers. And I know how quickly it can all be gone. How fast my descent down the spiral of procrastination and despair always goes. I should take preventative action, I tell myself. Now that I am back in the real world and not in the spiral. But I don't know what exactly to do. I am considering taking a lighter course load. Maybe giving myself an extra semester to finish college, and more time to rest properly. Find a job with a 30-hour workweek, or less mentally draining tasks. 

Anyways, everything is okay now. And it’s almost hard to relate to the hollow past self so caught up in insecurity and productivity. Plus I just met some really nice people who want me to keep in touch on Instagram. So I download the app quickly, and catch up on the texts I have missed. And it’s actually fine. I can have it on my phone without getting addicted. I’ve built up the discipline now to just use it for communication. I was just weak in the past.

Then it happens. A few days or weeks later, I come back from a workout, or a study session, or a long day with friends. Life is still good, or at least it is still life, with its regular ups and downs, and I am experiencing all of it. And I don’t even really think about it much. I mean, the impulse to scroll is still there somewhere. It has survived all detoxes and attempts at expunging it like a cockroach, feeding on my tendency to scroll emails or news articles or whatever else I still permit myself to indulge in. And suddenly I am half an hour's worth of 10-second videos deep, and I don’t know where the time is gone. But it's fine. I’ve earned it today, and I have to say the reels aren’t even as bad as I remember them. Some are actually pretty insightful, or funny or inspiring. 

And I feel so silly all of a sudden. Why have I disavowed this entire world from entering my life this last while. Surely I can find a middle ground. I mean everyone else scrolls and they seem fine. So it stays downloaded. Or maybe it gets deleted again, but I have broken down one of my barriers, and the next caving will be all the easier.

And maybe it's not that day. Maybe it's the next day or a week later or a month later. But at some point I realise I've slipped back in deep. That I can’t get out of bed without first scrolling for an hour, unless there is an absolutely pressing deadline, and even then I tend to be late. And I once again find it hard to sit still or even go to the toilet without distractions. I am talking too much in conversations because listening doesn’t stimulate enough. And waiting for something to load feels almost excruciating. In short, I am back. A deadline approaches, be it for university or work or a personal project. And the spiral has begun. Because I just can’t get myself to do it. I just can’t get myself to care. <a href="previews/OPSMAL.md" class="expand-essay">And so I am once again sitting there, paralysed, staring at what needs to be done. Feeling pathetic and miserable and resentful I didn't do enough to avoid this eventuality.</a>

Of course, it is not hard to blame the content either. To blame the high tech tailored research that has unleashed a black box algorithm utterly unconcerned with human wellbeing and held back by vanishingly few guardrails and an implicit goal of keeping users like myself addicted. To blame the companies that have monetised our attention and made untold sums of money out of learning how to maximally co-opt it, or the executives who routinely admit they don't want themselves or their loved ones anywhere near these digital slot machines they have created.

And often I do. It’s what leads me to delete the apps and boycott the companies involved whenever I can. It is one of the strongest forces that often pushes me towards completely quitting it all and striving to regain my attention span offline. I talk to friends who have given things up completely, discussing strategies and benefits and reminding each other just how lecherous to human flourishing these social media giants are.

But there is a trickiness to that approach too. In my case at least, it is one which is hard to detach from self-loathing. Because I know all this. I have known it for a long time. I was 16 the first time I read an in-depth expose on social media’s tendency to addict, indoctrinate and isolate by design. And implicitly I feel like I have known it to be true even longer, probably from the first time I ever found myself hooked on some app as young as 13. But all these years later, I still want to scroll. After a long, exhausting, draining day. I must admit I still crave content. So to tell myself it is all evil. To remind myself that I am really not sure I could fully quit forever if and when I decide to - and that I have consistently failed in this regard in the past. Well, those are some pretty hard truths to grapple with. It feels, at times, like I either have to admit the problem is far greater than myself and I am powerless against it. Or I have to acknowledge that this is a domain in which I continually let myself down, and where all my attempts at fundamental change have faltered. And neither of those feel like particularly helpful mindsets for putting in the work to actually help make the situation better.

This is all made only harder by the fact that I genuinely do love many of the videos I encounter. The algorithm may be evil but it is also a marvel of technology. It feeds me just enough of exactly what I think I want to see that I can't ever stay mad at it particularly long. And, of course, the content itself isn't even made by the big companies either. As I  am so often viscerally reminded, the creators themselves on these platforms are people just like me. They are making art to bring joy to others, to express the richness of their inner worlds and to receive some validation from all the other humans on the app. And sure, maybe it is shared through the panopticon of an unbelievably evil megacorporation, but hasn’t art always flourished regardless of the restrictions on its form. I mean a good portion of my feed is filled with people making exactly the type of content I am right now. Arguments as to why we should love honestly or fight for a better world or disconnect from social media, the only difference being that in their case it comes in a far more digestible and popular form, and is seen by a whole lot more people, myself included. Is it not precisely the case that much of what <a href="previews/OWAO.md" class="expand-essay">I have written in the last years</a> has been inspired by the content I have consumed on these very apps I wish to shun?

The answer is yes, of course lots of the content I have seen has inspired me. But I'm not going to let things end so easily there either. Because I was watching a video, this morning, which did inspire me. Chosen just for me as someone sceptical of the algorithm. The video started by filling my screen with an ever faster feed looking almost exactly like my own, before stopping abruptly and asking whether I remembered any of the last reels I had watched before this one. Unsurprisingly, I couldn't. To the tune of some beautiful music it then encouraged me to stop scrolling and the regain control. And I wanted to like this video. In many ways, I do like it. I like it because  I know a person likely made it with the very same goal in mind as I have with this essay - to help themselves and others escape the cycle. But when I watched it, I let it play once, paused for a second as felt something, and not a moment later I had scrolled onwards. And I felt empty. Here was this real, wonderful, human piece of art someone made, containing exactly the message I wanted to hear, exactly the message I needed to hear, and yet I couldn’t help but see it as another piece of slop in the heap. Indistinguishable from the 5-second ad for Peperoni Pizza that preceded it or the over-sexualised content that succeeded it. No matter how beautiful its message was, no matter what inspiration or joy it provided, it still was essentially just another part of the slop machine. In every way that matters it was still doing its part to keep me addicted and miserable.

And the idea that the medium is the message come into my mind. The idea I have always found so hard to accept because my mind always screams out that *surely*, surely regardless of the medium, humans making art can always get their message heard, can break through the barriers of whatever form they employ. And suddenly, in the context of short form video content that idea seems as true as the earth. Of course I can never really be convinced to quit Instagram from a video on Instagram. Any progress made in that regard, any elated feelings of joy that I have broken the cycle, will only be attributed back to the algorithm itself. Will only reinforce, somewhere deep in my monkey mind, that scrolling can be nice and good and revelatory. Any salvation it provides will only make the the next slippage all the more likely. However well intentioned, the content can never be good, I must conclude.

Needless to say, that's not strictly true either. I wouldn't be writing all this if it wasn't for those reels that inspired me. I wouldn't know many of the things I know about politics, history or myself. I wouldn't be in contact with many friends across the world. I wouldn't have known about many of the events I have attended, nor have been as easily able to do the activism I have done. All those things, those real tangible things, have undeniably been a direct result of remaining on the apps. Which all makes it very hard again to decry the whole thing as just a garbage slop machine. 

The thing is though I could theoretically stay in conctact with my friends via email, read books and talk to friends to learn about the world and keep informed about events directly also. In truth there is nothing I absolutely could not do without social media. But also in truth there is as of yet absolutely no place I can do it all so conveniently and quickly than on the apps either. If I had perfect self control they really would just be one of the most useful tools I had ever encountered, and not a bane on my existence. I suppose I just need to build up that self controll, <a href="previews/OPSMAL.md" class="expand-essay">but then again...</a>

And thus the cycle goes. Back and forth. The intellectual debate in my mind about whether these apps *should* be shunned following and justifying wherever I happen to be in the emotional process I began by describing. As surely as dawn follows dusk, the optimism follows the pessimism, the period of rejuvenation is followed by a fall from grace which then necessitates another period of rejuvenation. The whole thing remains predictable and depressing with no definitively lasting progress ever being made. 

And I guess all I can do is try to learn something each go around. To get better at bouncing back. To know when it’s time to step back and quit all the apps. To be both more forgiving to myself when I do fuck up, while at the same time being more stern in avoiding them in the first place. To walk the tightrope, and hope I can just get better at balancing. 

And that's all well and good. It's a positive thing that I've reached some acceptance of the cycle as it tends to unfold. But there’s something missing here. In this dramatisation of the emotions and overly intellectual treatment of the facts there is a key omission. Something left out not intentionally but consequentially nonetheless.

And what is missing is this; an admission of why this all happens. Of the root cause of these procrastination spirals in the first place regardless of their form: **It is because I am lonely and because I am scared.** 

Though I may find it hard to look in the eyes, I think that is the truth of the matter.

I am scared, scared whenever I go to write an essay, finish an assignment, send an email or even put off cleaning my room. Scared it won’t be good enough. *Scared I am not good enough*. And scared that people will see that, and judge me for it. Scared, on a fundamental level that my human need to be loved and accepted will be left unfulfilled. Scared, I think, in quite a human way, that I am somehow unworthy of all the love and community I receive, and that once my status as a complete and utter fraud is revealed through my inability to get this one thing done, it will all be revoked.

And you might regard that as overly pathologising. As part of my attempt to have every one of these pieces end in some grand, deep universalising truth. Perhaps it is. But it is also the case that when I am truly content, that when things are going swimmingly, none of these problems feel anywhere near as real. That it really is as simple as just deciding to do the thing. And that when I am not, when things, broadly speaking are not going so well in that month or that week or that day or that moment, that the exact same decision can feel somewhere between excruciatingly painful and utterly impossible. And that often it is hard, even for me, to know which of these states I might find myself in, or to what extent one decision not to do the thing I should do will help or hinder my ability to make the next. Whether the best way to escape the spiral is to rest or to act.

And on the surface this revelation sucks. Because it leaves me back at square one. It leaves me back in the position of having to do everything. Like reading and cooking and cleaning and meditation and working out and reaching out to my friends, digital hygiene and maintaining my attention span become more chores added to the list, more tasks I can worry about not quite living up to. Another way I can disappoint myself. What a shitty revelation. 

But in another, much more real way, it is the most wonderful revelation there can be. Because it means that all the basic contradictory facts about social media, about its tendency to addict and its tendency to delight, all remain true. It means to solve their, and my own contradictions is not to keep scraping the bottom of the barrel but to embrace them. It means the solution is not penance, repression or withholding. The solution is living. And in some ways it means this entire essay is useless other than to fast track the same realisation I have made, written and spoken out a hundred times already. And that is the terrifying, liberating truth is that **nothing less than everything will do**. Because the procrastination and the scrolling, the lack of motivation and the spirals, the wallowing and the self-loathing, they are all just symptoms. Symptoms of much bigger problems both within myself and without. Both within my control and without. And it is those I really have to do something about.

If I want to stop procrastinating and quit scrolling I don’t just have to stop procrastinating and quit scrolling. If I want to stop procrastinating and quit scrolling I have to be content. To wrestle with all that is within me. To be open and vulnerable and connect with friends and loved ones. To go outside and to do sport and stay healthy. To meditate and to write and to figure myself out. To rest and recover and be patient with myself. To fight back against the powers that be and help build reliable alternative communities and systems that uplift. I have to do everything, simply everything. And that is lovely, actually. Because responsibility is a privilege and a gift and all those tasks are truly wonderful things to get to do anyway. Far better, in truth, than scrolling or procrastination has even been.

But yes, to conclude, deleting Instagram is usually a pretty good place to start.