# On Revisitations and This Thing You Are Reading

I wrote a piece some years ago, about revisitation, the tendency to forget things we once knew, and about the joy of relearning them. It’s a good piece, I think. One of my favourites that I’ve written. One that I reread and think: “Wow, I sure used to write some things” and “This is actually so true\!”

It’s a piece, I suppose, that feels quite relevant to me at the moment. Because I am starting to realise I have been on autopilot for a while. Not necessarily in a bad way. Just in a living each day without thinking all too much about the bigger picture kind of way. I accomplished things, skills were learned and great times were had. But a sense of purposelessness loomed just beyond the horizon, and battling out of darker moments felt all the harder without some concrete vision of hope.

<a href="previews/OHMAN.md" class="expand-essay">I have always been a dreamer at heart, with visions and schemes and lofty notions abounding.</a> But as important decisions have cropped up recently I have increasingly realised that my process for making them has been reduced to not a whole lot more than short-sighted pleasure seeking, with some echoes of a more conscious time as boundary markers.

I didn't lose myself entirely, of course. In most ways, I was still absolutely me. I did many things I remain proud of. But I wasn't completely and fully there the whole time. Or at least, the me who was there wasn’t always me enough. I was hesitant, for one reason or another, to make each decision congruent with who I am. To crane my neck up above the clouds and get motivation and direction from some bigger purpose and plan. And that’s a problem. Because the current of society is strong; it's very easy to get caught up in and end up somewhere you didn’t quite want to be. And the more I think about it, the more determined I am to end up somewhere completely upriver. To let the current of what the world might want me to be pass me by, and choose a place to land myself. And that, I am remembering now, is something which requires effort. Consistent effort. It’s not a hobby you can pick up and then neglect. Nor a fun weekend activity. The stream pulls too strong for lapses.

And that all might sound a bit melodramatic. Or oversimplistic. But it does ring true. I can remember being better, being happier in who I am and in the path I am threading. And that feels like a real advantage. Because I can also remember battling out of the insecure years of my youth, with only external guarantees that consistent and permanent self-improvement was an achievable goal. And now I know it’s possible. I have forged confidence and <a href="previews/OLP.md" class="expand-essay">contentedness</a> and <a href="previews/OLP.md" class="expand-essay">self-love</a> before. I can do it again. And this time I’m aiming for even higher peaks and more sustainable practices.

And as I emerge from autopilot, I am realising there are a whole bunch of important decisions that need to be made. And I am being struck all at once with the exciting desire to reconnect with the things I once believed. To find within me the dormant motivations and convictions and live them proudly once again. So I suppose it is high time to practice that revisiting thing I once wrote about. And to revisit this practicing thing I know holds the key: the daily effort required to fight the flow and live my life as I want it to be. And I can think of no better place to start than with getting back down to this <a href="previews/OWAO.md" class="expand-essay">writing thing, which once gave me so much joy and purpose,</a> and has since been relegated to a pipe-dream or occasional hobby.

Luckily also, my past efforts in the pondering and writing regard have made the task of revisiting and relearning much easier for myself. Like an organisation hoping to achieve longevity beyond its members, I have stored a revival document for Killian across the pieces of my past. And in particular, I can think of no better source for such a rebooting than the collection of essays I once wrote and curated, as a gift for my Sister Clara's 18th birthday. The birthday present from her to me which, after initially foolishly throwing away, I rescued and turned into a book of thoughts and ideas from myself and my friends, with the goal of making navigating her early adult years some amount easier. The very collection which contained that essay on revisitation I still revisit today. A book which, from writing it at the time, to gifting it, to rereading and sharing it with people to this day, has brought me so much happiness. And a book which I will gladly admit is clichéd and clunky and full of advice so evidently from a naive 20-year-old. And yet a book which still stands as one of my proudest accomplishments. And, as admitted in the essays themselves, which was in the end, somewhat less about lessons for Clara, and more about being a space for me to reflect, disentangle and capture my thoughts on a variety of topics of importance to me at the time.

And yet, in a horrendous expose of the cliché that time is progress, this book also stands as something I have felt wholly unable to recreate recently. As a form of art and expression I have somehow become no longer capable of. It’s a conclusion I have kept well out of reach of my daily thoughts to prevent recognition of its untold devastating implications. Until now, at least. Because, bringing it into the light of day, I have realised that this conclusion is fucking wrong. That I absolutely am still capable of such an endeavour and that a thorough proving of such is long overdue. Indeed, there is perhaps no better remedy for my feelings of lostness and inability to make decisions.

So what you are reading now is a very similar collection of essays on topics, written to prove I still can, and to get back in touch with myself, whatever that might entail. But this time it really is explicitly and openly for myself. It is the manual of thoughts for creating a Killian. The true and updated rebooting guide should I ever find myself in a whistless slump again where I have, even if only partially, forgotten who I am. Or, more realistically, a curious artefact for myself and others who care enough to look back on and read and think: ‘Wow, those sure are some thoughts.’

And its creation will also, I hope, serve as an exploration. Most of the themes I want to write about are not ones on which I need to preserve my current thoughts, but precisely those where I have not nailed things down on yet. And, more generally, few prospects excite me more, than delving into topics, seeking out guidance and wisdom, untangling my own thoughts and other’s insights and wrapping it all in a meandering essay. So sitting here now, at the start of this project, I have no idea where I will end up. I’m hoping for somewhere new and old and familiar and challenging.  But we’ll see. I truly have no idea. And that is great.

Because the secret is, I am more than anything hoping to be wrong. To contradict much of what is written here by the end. Or ignore the prescriptions altogether. And I am hoping that any of the lovely people who take the time to read all this nonsense will be kind enough to share where and how exactly they find mistakes and contradictions themselves. Or maybe where they just plain disagree. If I am truly going to chart where exactly my head is at on topics of such importance to me, there is no worse fate I can think of than for those conclusions to be left unchallenged and stagnant and stale.

So I hope you enjoy these musings. Whether you are me in the future or a trusted friend or someone else entirely who happened upon this by some strange coincidence. I hope you enjoy the sentences and think about them and disagree with them and write me impassioned letters about them. Because as someone sorting his thoughts and convictions out right now and cramming them into these imperfect words, I feel obliged to tell you this: it is an absolutely fantastic feeling.