# On Red vs Blue and the Unbearable Individuality of Being

I have just finished the last ever season of the popular web series Red vs. Blue, and I am emotional. Partly because of how it ended: a nostalgic trip down memory lane with a heartfelt goodbye at the end, from the company founded through making it, and for which the final season marks their last ever project before liquidation. But more, I think, because it really is over now. More because this show was a core part of my teenage years, and is now, and forever, finished. There will be no more revivals, no more spin-offs, no more seasons tacked on to the end for the sake of nostalgia. Not that I would have watched them. But with their end it sinks in, deeper than before, that no one I know might ever really get it. That my love for this show can only grow nicher. And that stings a little. Right now actually, it stings a lot.

Because Red vs. Blue wasn’t some ordinary show. God no. I was far too nerdy of a kid for that. No, Red vs. Blue was a web series made entirely using the video game series Halo, with a technique called machinima, where you use the characters in the game as puppets to tell a story. Or at least, that’s how it started, back in 2003 when I didn’t even know what a video game was. And in the years from then until my world clashed with the series around 2012 it evolved from crappy microphones and dick jokes into a fully fledged series with a dedicated fanbase, complex characters, motion-captured fight scenes and Elijah Wood to boot. And I ate it up. From the moment I saw an episode I thought it was the coolest thing ever, and tried with only rare success to get everyone I knew to watch it too. Eventually giving up on that effort, I resigned myself to let my obsession grew internally, as I perhaps for the first time discovered my penchant for rewatching things obsessively.

And so, for distraction and celebration across key moments both good and bad in my teenage years, I threw on an episode. And the series became irreversibly lodged into the tapestry of my anxious and insecure teenage years. As with any good story for coming of age to, it was, at its core, just about a bunch of weirdos coming together to do something great. Some bits made me emotional and made me think, and others were just a humorous and silly escape; a comforting base to return to. And it remained, admittedly, deeply niche and deeply nerdy. Which is absolutely fine by me. But it meant that I never really found someone I could talk to about it. Not really. I’ve met people who have watched the show, of course, just as I’ve convinced others close to me into watching it too. But I never met someone who understood.

I could never explain just how pivotal this show has been to my life. How Epsilon’s ponderings on love and memory have guided me through relationships and heartbreak. Or how even just listening to the soundtrack wells up emotions in me every time. Why I often prefer not saying goodbye. Or why I still attribute much of my love for writing to a fan fiction episode I wrote at 15 which won a competition on the community subreddit. Even now, years later, I wonder how I can possibly explain why I still return to the show frequently, despite the jokes and visuals being increasingly dated. Or how I now realise this show made in a video game was one of the first pieces of media to calm the crippling existential dread of my teens, helping me learn that if life doesn’t make any sense, you might as well enjoy it and make some good friends along the way. It might seem so trivial, but I can’t help but wonder how it can be that sitting here and formulating the sentences for this topic feels more difficult to make universally coherent than almost anything else I have ever written about. Surely it can’t really be that hard.

Perhaps it is just a question of communication. <a href="previews/OWAO.md" class="expand-essay">Of sitting down and picking the right words, formulating the perfect metaphors and wrapping it all in a beautiful piece that captures the feelings I went through.</a> Perhaps then others would understand. Maybe I just need to become a better writer, a better storyteller, and I could make it happen. Maybe words chosen cleverly enough really can capture any experience.

Then again, I’ve read enough basic philosophy of language to know that’s unlikely. That my red and your blue might be completely different to begin with, and that’s before they are versus each other. And the thing is, it does not feel enough to simply explain regardless. I want to talk to people who not only empathise with my excitement and memories, but who have their own. Who will add and build and reminisce with me. I want someone, I suppose, who is not just watching the show to appease my 24-year-old self, but who also had it as a companion for the trials and tribulations of their formative years. I can accept this is an unreasonable, maybe even childish request, but I cannot deny it is something I yearn for.

And I cannot deny that there is some part of me that can’t help but imagine some soulmate, <a href="previews/OLP.md" class="expand-essay">romantic</a> or platonic or otherwise, who does get it. The perfect person just for me, who on rewatching it would yelp and laugh and tear up at all the same moments and share in my excitement. Who would turn it from an individual obsession to a shared collusion. I know it's a fantasy. I know it is unrealistic. And even worse, I know that really, even if they’ve seen all 18 seasons of Red vs. Blue during their teens, it actually wouldn’t even be enough. That there are so many other books and films and hobbies close to my heart that they can’t possibly love them all. That no one has lived the exact same life, consumed the exact same media and felt the exact same feelings as I have. And that I wouldn’t, in the end, want to talk to some clone of myself about these things anyways. 

But that doesn’t stop it from bothering me. It doesn’t stop me from listening to my favourite songs and wanting to gush about them uncontrollably. It doesn’t stop me from looking over at the person I have convinced to watch some show that I love or read a book that changed me and hope with every fibre of my being that they love it too. Staring at them intensely for every slight appearance of emotion on their face, desperate not to confront the reality that it just might not mean as much to them as it does to me. It doesn’t stop me, and I don't think it ever will. I think I am just wired this way, with a desperate need for others to understand just why I love something. It’s a strange and lonely sensation. This unbridgeable gulf between mine and others experiences, which I repeatedly and desperately try to overcome.

I guess I can only take solos in the fact that the feeling is far from unique. That so many others have their own version of that show that only they seem to get. That in the age of the internet all of our media experiences are unique and curated, and that even when two people have seen the same thing, in all likelihood they are doubtful to think about it in the same way. That in some strange way one of the few things that truly unites us all as humans is that we can be pretty positive <a href="previews/OHMAN.md" class="expand-essay">our time on this planet has been absolutely singular</a>, and that to really fully and completely communicate the totality of that uniqueness to someone would itself take a lifetime. We are all floating off in our individual ships of life, and we are never really able to stay on the same path for very long. I guess I just have to believe there is some sort of beauty in this shared curse of fundamental loneliness.

I mean, surely it can’t just be desperate attempts at miscommunication untill the end.

I can’t bear the idea of feeling this alone forever.

Well then again. I never really do, do I? I always find a way to reach out. To be heard, and to hear others. It doesn’t matter if the philosophers say it might be theoretically impossible, we do it anyway. As the series itself concludes: It's not so important why we are here, what matters is who we share the experience with. Life is meant to be shared, it's as simple as that.

So maybe I'll convince someone I love to watch the entire series with me one day. Maybe they'll love it, and share in my obsession and understand how it impacted my development as a person. Probably not though. And that's fine. It won't stop me trying. With Red Vs Blue and Sugar Pine 7 and all the other weird shows and films that shaped me. With the music I love and the books that changed my thinking. With the indescribable experiences and quirky little thoughts I've had. With the foods I dream about and the smells that conjure vivid memories. With all the random things that have made up my unique little life. <a href="previews/OCCBP.md" class="expand-essay">It will never stop me from trying to find those who relate, those who connect, and those who can understand.</a> Because when I think about it, in the infinity of possible lived and interpreted experience, it's pretty incredible just how much commonality we are consistently able to find. And I suppose, if I am really honest with myself, it’s pretty exciting that it’ll never all be contained in one person.

My thoughts on this, as on many other things, are ultimately that all I must do is try. And just like I was told to as a kid, I am going to try my very best to share as much as I can. To share, openly and honestly and with enthusiasm, especially when it is hard. And to relish when others take the time to share in kind. To delight in the fact that we choose to do it regardless. That we may never know for sure whether and how the message is received, but we try anyway.  
I suppose, to quote the show itself:  
“In the end, we just have to have faith.  
Ain’t that a bitch.”