# On the Dao and all the Other Things I don't know Anything About

I lie on my friend's couch. I am tired and hungover. The window next to me is open and the breeze it is letting in is cold, fresh and pleasantly uncomfortable. In the other room, I can hear my friends chatting. Two are childhood friends, visiting from home. The other four form my extended roommate friend group here in Berlin, which we have begun referring to as <a href="previews/OCCBP.md" class="expand-essay">*The Commune*</a>.

Fading in and out of awareness, I catch snippets of their conversation and their laughter. I breathe softly and smile to myself. Though my body is in pain, I am feeling utterly at peace and unbelievably content. And it doesn't feel like a sensation that will fade anytime soon.

I begin to think about <a href="previews/ORTTYAR.md" class="expand-essay">this collection of essays, and how I was feeling when I started it</a>; lost, unsure and without baseline convictions to fall back on. It's a collection of feelings I don’t find hard to conjure up, having spent days in the depths of them as recently as two weeks prior. And I have no doubts I will find myself in their throws again. But something has changed in the last year and a half. Of that I am certain. The lostness doesn’t feel quite as scary. The spirals are fewer and further between. The decisions and changes and realisations I have made have begun to bear fruit. And increasingly as I look around at my life, I am hit with waves of explosive gratitude. Life, in short, is good. Or more realistically, I have once again remembered how to appreciate it as such. 

I stand, I suppose, at the opposite end of the pendulum swing in outlook. And I desperately want to bottle up this feeling, this mentality. To keep it from escaping me. Because I know I’ve been here, or somewhere like it, before. <a href="previews/ORTTYAR.md" class="expand-essay">And I know as well, that these words, these essays, this manual, are supposed to be for exactly that.</a> For capturing and mapping out the path from melancholy and despair to hope and joy. But it still feels incomplete in an important way. 

So I sit down and begin a rather foolish endeavour: to finish the essay on the most important lessons I have ever learned: the ones I don’t think can ever fully be captured in words. And, paradoxically perhaps, the ones which almost all my favourite pieces of writing are ultimately about.

The first time I endeavoured to take on such a task, in the collection of essays I made for my sister, it was called ‘On Music and Enjoying Life’, and it was very much inspired by Buddhist ideas I had encountered. This time I have instead decided to entitle it ‘On the Dao and all the other things I don't know anything about’, and the inspiration is more Daoist in origin. But don’t let this distinction fool you into thinking the message is not the same. I simply wish to at least cite my most recent and prominent sources in each case, in an essay which promises to plagiarise from almost everything I have ever read, heard or experienced and considered worth knowing.

In every way that matters, the core of what I am trying to say here would be the same regardless of which philosophy, ideology or piece of art I could have chosen to borrow the terminology from. And it is that point, more than anything else, that I am really hoping to get across. Hoping to preserve in amber for my future self and any other readers.

To return to the tangible, though, I read a book some time ago called *The Tao of Pooh* by Benjamin Hoff, which I thoroughly enjoyed. It was an instant all-timer for me, the type of book which felt <a href="previews/OHMAN.md" class="expand-essay">divinely timed</a> (one of a very small collection of English books in my favourite second hand bookshop in Budapest), as well as immediately revelatory. I read it at an important point in my life too. I was cycling around the world. Or at least I was attempting to do so, fated only to make it as far as the country of Georgia. Regardless, I was in a place and time where my life was mostly simple, free and happy. Where most days I only had to think of pedalling enough, eating enough and finding a place to pitch my tent. On a similarly peak of the pendulum swing as I find myself now, I suppose. 

And in this setting I read this book, which told me, in its own words: “There are things about ourselves that we need to get rid of; there are things we need to change. But at the same time, we do not need to be too desperate, too ruthless, too combative. Along the way to usefulness and happiness, many of those things will change themselves, and the others can be worked on as we go. The first thing we need to do is recognize and trust our own Inner Nature, and not lose sight of it.” 

And a great many other things too. I will not try to impart every lesson contained within it to you now. The book itself does a much better job of that than I could ever do. And regardless, the whole point of this essay is to elucidate why that would be a rather foolish endeavour. But I will tell you this because it is important for today's narrative: rightly or wrongly that book was the second in a cascading confluence of events at the time which sparked my interest in Daoist philosophy. The first being another book I was taken by on that trip, Siddhartha by Herman Hesse, which while ostensibly about Buddhism, I had been informed by an online comment was in fact far more Daoist in outlook.

To clumsily return to my reminiscings, it is hard to put into words how much those books meant to me at the time. How much levity they gave me as I cycled my way across Europe. I couldn’t even explain it to those who were with me. Those ostensibly in the same circumstances. Kai, Mitch, Carla, Luisa, Eziquel and all the other people I spent time with as I made my slow march from Munich to Central Asia. But I would like to think they noticed regardless. I’d like to think that the sensation of floating I had and the ‘let things come as they may’ attitude I was cultivating shone through to the outside. Of course, I remained fallible and human, as anyone who spent time with me was more than aware. But more so than any other period of my life, I feel like I was doing a pretty damn good job at living out so many of the ideals I often just aspire to. And I feel like those books, and the ideas within, were one of the most important factors in that.

So, after my eventual return to Germany to start a Masters I did what I felt to be the reasonable thing; I decided I would spend my third semester in China to try to follow up on this Daoism lead as best I could, and see where it would take me. I enrolled myself in the exchange programme to Tsinghua University Beijing, saved some money, secured funding from the German government and began to learn some Chinese in preparation for the adventure to come. 

A great deal of other things happened in that time also. A year can be an unbelievably large unit of time. Enough for truths lived to slip into ideals occasionally revisited and on into theoretical concepts sporadically pondered. By the time I got to Beijing there were a million things on my mind, a million excuses and fears in the way of my enlightenment, and the most intense culture-shock of my life to be navigated. So I didn't do a very good job of following up on that Daoism thread. At least, not explicitly.

I did, finally, spend a lot of time on some of the activities that I had long neglected. I read, mostly about Chinese history. <a href="previews/OWAO.md" class="expand-essay">I wrote</a>, mostly in the form of the essays that make up this collection. I studied, the machine learning courses that had become the new main reason for my being in China. I explored, the city and country I had the privelege to be visiting. And I unwinded, both by myself and with the new friends I made. Life was good. Time passed swimmingly, and it was only almost two months in that I remembered about those books I had read and the philosophy they were inspired by.

So I set out to find the source of that well of knowledge, from the confines of my new life in Beijing. I read about the Daoist faith, its many gods and traditions and storied history, as well as its connections to the philosophy of my interest. I read critiques of the simplifications made in both books which had started my inquiry, and their Western, Orientalist lens. I read online debates about where one should start and if one can ever even hope to understand a sliver of Daoist philosophy without devoting many years to the pursuit and/or learning classical Chinese. And I also settled, amongst all this online debate, on the next full text I wanted to read. *The Zhuangzi* is a collection of writings, the core of which are attributed to a 4th century BCE philosopher of the same name. Together with the popular short and cryptic *Laozi* (Tao Te Ching), it is considered a foundational text of Daoist philosophy, and a classical masterpiece in its own right. A pretty good place to start then.

But no sooner had I settled on the book, than a new challenge emerged to slow me down: picking a translation. While before I may have just accepted the first one that came my way, with all my newfound knowledge weighing me down, the task suddenly felt insurmountable. I wanted to get at the core of this philosophy, to really understand it as best as I could from a single book, and not, as I had in the past, be held back by the biases and ideology of whichever Westerner was delivering these ideas to me. So I started doing research. And the task only grew more complicated. Each translation had its critics and fans, reviews describing it as accurate and revelatory or as false and undecipherable garbage. And all this was only compounded by the next debate I stumbled across, as to whether only the 'Inner chapters' (most commonly attributed to Zhuangzi himself) or also the 'Outer chapters' should be considered as the true version of the text. Which is not even to mention the fact that even within the inner chapters, many paragraphs are considered likely to be notes by subsequent readers. There seemed to be no end to the decisions I would have to navigate, lest my understanding be tainted by false interpretations and baises.

I was beginning to spiral: lost and paralysed by infinite information with only a finite mind and finite time in which to process it all and come to a decision. And a fundamental question kept nagging me from somewhere at the back of my mind: what exactly I was even looking for from this book in the first place? While the arguments spurning *Siddhartha* and *Wanderings on the Way* as Daoism westernised and distorted into esoteric introspection for modern readers had taken root in me, was it not also the case that fundamentally, as much as I may shy away from the description, I really was precisely just a Westerner looking precisely for actionable self-help in a distant and ancient philosophy. Eventually I settled on ‘Wanderings on the Way’, a translation by Victor H. Mair. Mostly because I liked the name. But also because all this pondering and hesitating was beginning to feel quite fruitless, and indeed quite antithetical to the little I felt I did know about Daoist ideals. 

Ultimately and predictably I devoured the book in short order and I loved it. It was cryptic enough I could project much of the insight I had arrived with into it, while remaining insightful enough that it challenged me fundamentally and gave me much on which to ponder and reflect. And, more pressing to our current story, to me it confirmed what I had perhaps really known all along. That much of my research was misdirected. That none of the translations would contain the unfiltered wisdom of the long dead Zhuangzi himself. That even if they did I probably wouldn't understand any of it (because that man spoke in jokes, tricks and riddles at the best of times, as well as in a language and for a culture I have vanishing little knowledge of). And most importantly, that none of that really mattered anyways. Because any version of it I did read, including the one I chose in the end, would nonetheless be insightful and revelatory and contain truths which could change my life, if I was open to them.

To quote a parable from Zhuangzi himself (via Victor H. Mair and a host of other messengers): "Master Hui said to Master Chuang, 'I have a big tree people call Stinky Quassia. Its great trunk is so gnarled and knotted that it cannot be measured with an inked line. Its small branches are so twisted and turned that neither compass nor L-square can be applied to them. It stands next to the road, but carpenters pay no attention to it. Now, sir, your words are just like my tree — big, useless, and heeded by no one.'
'Sir,' said Master Chuang, 'are you the only one who hasn't observed a wild cat or a weasel? Crouching down, it lies in wait for its prey. It leaps about east and west, avoiding neither high, nor low, until it gets caught in a snare or dies in a net. Then there is the yak, big as the clouds suspended in the sky. It's big, all right, but it can't catch mice. Now you, sir, have a big tree and are bothered by its uselessness. Why don't you plant it in Nevernever Land with its wide, open spaces? There you can roam in nonaction by its side and sleep carefreely beneath it. Your Stinky Quassia's life will not be cut short by axes, nor will anything else harm it. Being useless, how could it ever come to grief'"

In my interpretation, this tells me I could spend all day lamenting the translation (and a great many other things) for what they are not and will never be: a definitive and easily approachable intro to Daoism through the unfiltered teachings of an ancient philosopher for one. Or I could begin to appreciate and enjoy them for what they are: a trove of ancient wisdom written, rewritten and expanded by many more than one individual, themselves all humans full of endlessly insightful thoughts and ideas, which was then finally refracted through the lens of translation by an entirely different person from a different time with his own unique insights, interpretations and assumptions. Luckily, I chose the latter. Luckily I remembered there's not much to be gained in what would have, should have or could have been.

And to me all that, the back and forth and the wasted research and indecision was the lesson itself. The fact that after perusing endless online reviews and debates I chose a perfectly good translation on gut feeling alone was as important of a takeaway as anything I had read. Because to think that exclusively the raw, unfiltered source material from one specific guy who lived a long time ago has anything to teach us, is to deny what is to me the most essential teaching of those very writings: that wisdom, intuition, instinct, quality, *the way*, whatever you might want to call it, is and has always been within all of us. That there is no wizardry in wisdom, no irreplaceable individuality in insight. That the ancient philosophers and semi-mythical figures, just as with the modern scholars, critics, commenters and artists have always just been ordinary people, just like me or you. And that enough ordinary people, given enough time can come up with every single piece of genius you have ever heard of. In fact, they already did.

And that is terrifying, because it means there are no infallible sources of universal truth to fall back on. In fact, depending on the day, I think it might mean there are no universal truths at all. But, importantly, it is also utterly liberating. Because it means you can't know everything and neither can anyone else and as a result you don't have to understand any particular thing at all. The infinity of knowable things frees us up to know only the things we do know, and to be perfectly content with that.

But what happens, you might ask, if we don't know all the things we need to know yet? A great question, I would say, having written it. The answer to which is simple: as long as you, in this current moment, know how to learn and how to listen I would say you know plenty. Beyond being capable and willing to change and grow there is not a whole lot else you absolutely need. And even those skills, I suspect, it is never too late to learn or relearn.

And, if you really want me to, I will even go a step further and say this:

It seems to me that all the most important life lessons; the ones which bear infinite repeating and relearning, are indeed almost infinitely repeated across human art and conversation. And discovering them, I have found, often feels more like rediscovery than epiphany. Even if the form is fresh and the details feel revelatory, some part of me is swept up by the (dis)comfort of having known deep down all along.

And I could be regretful, and wish I had really known them and acted upon them sooner. But that doesn't seem to achieve much. Other than to delay the next lesson being learned out of fear I may feel stupid again. But if instead I am able to turn towards the possibilities they bring, then I am left brimming with excitement, empathy, understanding and even pride in my past self. The person I can now see was grasping in the dark for precisely this truth. The person who in many senses and on many days, was already so very close to finding it. Who probably even managed for a time, before forgetting. Who, just like me in this very moment, though I may be using lofty words to give the appearance of the opposite, knows only a very small sliver of all the truths there are to be known. 

I can only speak from my own experiences in this, and all regards, of course. But as I see it at least, there really is not much to worry ourselves about on this front. Most of what you need to know to live your life to its fullest is within you already. And all the rest will be delivered to you endlessly from all angles and in all forms until you let it stick. You just have to want to hear it.

Take all this with a pint of salt of course. Who am I to speak on such matters but an ordinary person who feels pretty happy with where they are in life. In many ways I am likely wrong. Much of my happiness is the result of bling luck anyways. And perhaps the particular form of this essay or of your life renders any insights I have managed to gather here utterly useless. Perhaps by your own particular nature the message you need to hear is the very opposite of what I have to say. Perhaps I have not quite succeeded in pressing these thoughts into words such that they are intelligible by anyone else but me. Perhaps it all really just boils down to the fact that when you arrive to a text or an idea with the lens of what you already believe it is hardly surprising to emerge having rediscovered truths you already knew. I mean my whole argument earlier was that there isn't really any objective truth nor truth-sayers anyways.

Regardless, my (unfounded as it always is) advice is this. Know thyself and trust yourself. Because when you are no longer fighting yourself. When you are honest with what you know and what you don't, with what you can and what you can't. When you realise the gifts you were given, the ones which make you you, perhaps the very ones you have often spurned as curses, are in fact the exact tools for the job. It is in those moments that things will click into place, and you will realise, if only for a fleeting instant, that you are heading in the right direction. That it all makes sense somehow. And that in truth, you really do know enough already. Enough to move forward.

But I digress. The real point I am trying to get across is one you have likely heard a million times already. And one, as I have said, which can rarely be summed up well in words. So whether it ends up ringing true or not, I will add one more instance to that list:

