# On (not) Writing and Audiences of One

I haven't written in a while.  
It's a sentence I used to launch out often. As a pre-emptive cover, perhaps, in case whatever I was writing was shit. But also in conversation, in the way an ex-athlete might say they haven't been on the court in a while. Not necessarily because it's relevant, but because they can't stop the thought from coming to the fore. Because although I may be the only one who describes myself as a writer, writing still feels like a part of my identity. No matter how long it has been since I have actually written, it still feels like some obligation I must fulfil, to live this life properly.  
I haven't written in a while.  
The statement is not true any more, as I write this. Recently I've been writing a whole lot. But at many times in my life it has been. And for most of last year it was resolutely and persistently true. And I was painfully aware, with each passing month, that I just wasn’t writing enough. Despite often having all the time in the world to do so. 

And then something changed. Or many things did, and a year later I find myself back to hastily scribbled phone notes and late night writing sessions with music blaring in my earphones and far too many tabs open. It is hard to say the exact cause. Such shifts are always complex and multifaceted. But I personally like a neat narrative, so I'll oversimplify and neatly wrap the revival’s genesis into a brief drunken conversation, with a good friend who actually does write.  
It was January of this year, and we were sat in a trendy bar in London, intermittently enjoying drunk conversations between the performances of wildly eclectic and experimental musicians. And at some point in the evening she fixed her gaze on me and asked point-blank whether I was writing. I gave her a half answer, a deflection, a joke, and somewhere buried in it all a comment about just not having enough time. It was enough for her to know, I am sure. Because writing doesn’t just happen. It doesn't just come pouring out. For me at least. And so if I wasn’t trying, wasn’t making the time, it wasn’t going to just happen on its own. And she looked at me, and said all she needed to: “That’s a shame, I thought you were pretty good.”   
The night continued, new topics emerged. But for months after that, I couldn't get that sentence out of my head. “I thought you were pretty good.” Somehow, it made the fact that I had stopped writing feel all the worse. Like a real damn shame, in fact.

Perhaps the real shame might be that I obviously require such external validation. But it is not hard to draw a direct line from that comment to <a href="previews/ORTTYAR.md" class="expand-essay">a questioning, a reprioritising and eventually a whole lot of writing, which ended up created this thing you are reading now.</a> So I would be remiss not to discuss the process of writing itself here, and why comments like that tend to give so much fuel to my creative fire.

The thing is, I love writing. Actually thinking of which word should follow the last and <a href="previews/OHMAN.md" class="expand-essay">how it might all connect</a> is a process that give me unending joy. I think of the late, great Anthony Bourdain, who when asked whether writing or being a chef was harder responded: “Cooking professionally is hard work. Writing is a privilege and a luxury. Anybody who whines about writer's block should be forced to clean squid all day.”  
Now, I have never cleaned a squid, but I harbour no doubts about the fact that the chance to write is an immense privilege, and one in which I am only too happy to indulge in. The writing itself has always been a pleasure. The difficulty for me has always been in the sitting down. In finding the time, the motivation and the reason to turn on the word machine in the first place.

Because it all feels very self-indulgent, doesn't it? Writing like this, with an intended audience. There is a reason for the very clear mental divide I have between the necessary dumping of my thoughts into my journal, and the more self-absorbed act of writing with some external audience in mind (even if I maintain the facade that these pieces are entirely and exclusively for my future self). Because the second form requires the conceit that I know something worth reading. That my words somehow matter enough to warrant your attention, be you a future self or otherwise. There is some arrogance in art that is unavoidable, if not necessary. And so when I have some free time to kill, and some motivation to use it, I can’t help but wonder why I would spend it writing. Why I would not spend it instead <a href="previews/OCCBP.md" class="expand-essay">with some friends, or on meditation</a> or doing a sport or any of the other things I know to combine self-improvement with enjoyment. Or even just going out and trying to make the world a better place directly. Or, more realistically, if I am going to be indulgent anyway, why not just go the full mile and enjoy switching my brain off to some media while I prepare for another day? Why, in short, do I think that this writing stuff is worthwhile? For me and, more importantly, for all the other people I share this planet with.

Let's be real, way back in my teenage years, most of the initial motivation for this writing obsession was undeniably delusions of grandeur. Fantasies that my writing would impact millions, and they would love me for creating it. From when I was around 15 years old and for an embarrassingly long time after, I had a recurring daydream which would begin with some variation on the phrase: “My favourite thing about Killian's writing is \_”. Said, presumably, by an imaginary adoring fan, I would then go on to imagine some genius aspect of some imaginary creation of mine. The lay-psychologists among us can do with that one what they will. I would personally say it was fairly egregiously self-aggrandising, especially considering I rarely ever finished pieces at the time.

And of course I never finished any pieces. Motivation from imagined fame is fickle and limited. Rarely lasting long enough to even stay sat and writing for an extended period of time, before being crushed against the realities and frustrations of the process itself. The constant deletions and critical revisitation that remind me, persistently and undeniably, that I am not some writing prodigy. And that I will not, indeed, stream-of-consciousness myself into an accidental masterpiece on the first run.

More pressingly, as I got older, relying on fame as a source of inspiration increasingly feels a bit gross, and in conflict with my view of the world. I am forever, I would say justifiably, weary of any thoughts that imply I am better than others. And other than betting on winning a sort of lottery of luck in timing and connections, I find it hard to conceive of any mental model of a pathway to fame that doesn't require such a conceited thought. Especially when I have no intention of giving up the ample time I enjoy spending with friends and family, on sports and adventures and simply hanging around doing not much of anything.  Which is all to say that even if there was a meritocratic celebrity process, I couldn't even rely on out-hustling the competition. No. I am never going to be a famous author whose books sell for their name alone. I am never going to be famous at all, I would say. And indeed, letting go of that fantasy, in writing and other aspects of my life, has been and remains one of the most freeing processes I have ever undertaken. There is an incomparable freedom in knowing you are small and ordinary.

Of course, I will be the first to admit it is one thing to say this all theoretically, and quite another to fully accept it in my soul. Progress in this regard had been slow and uneven. No matter how much I repeat the mantra that I will never be famous in my mind, it is undeniable, for example, that when I read a book which expresses with more precision or lucidity than I feel capable of, an idea which I thought was unique to me, some part of me commiserates. Because it acknowledges that this makes the real chances of any imagined fame all the slimmer. Some part of me, clearly is far from giving up on the dreams of having thousands read my work. And I am not sure if it ever fully will. As with everything, letting go of these fantasies is a work in process. For now, I can be quite content, I would say, to cherish the positive side of those humbling moments where I discover my ideas are not as brilliantly singular as I might have thought they were. The excitement of feeling the world expand, the wonder of knowing I get to stand on ever higher shoulders, and the importance of feeling very small all the way up there.

All of this is not to say that I don't want eyes on my words, to be clear. Nor that I would consider an ethical income for my creative endeavours anything other than an incredible blessing. Indeed, it strikes me that letting go of some idea of grand novels enjoyed across the world opens up the door to so many more considered and targeted formats. The joy has always been in the process anyway, and there is so much more to go off and to be inspired by when the audience is conceivable, manageable and known. The last thing I want to do is exclude any possibilities of me somehow carving out my own little niche of people who enjoy my work. I sometimes think there are few things I would love more. It is just to say that I certainly in need of a better source of motivation than fame or adoration. 

Which brings me around to audiences of one. Because that’s really what gets me here. Not an imaginary adoring fan. But a real tangible close friend, one of the very few people who has read some of my work, expressing that she liked it. And that’s what I’m really chasing. What feels like a sustainable source of inspiration. And what helps me remember, that when I say I didn’t write at all last year, that’s not even really true. The truth, in fact, is that I spent considerable portions of 2023 writing, rewriting and pondering one of my favourite literary genres: the <a href="previews/OLP.md" class="expand-essay">(love)</a> letter. 

As part of a whirlwind multi-continent entanglement with a fellow aspirational writer, I actually often took the time to sit down and reflect and condense and write. And I received 5 of the most touching pieces I have ever read, addressed to me personally, in return. Pieces I still think about and quote to myself, in some wonder they could have been made just for me. And in trying my best to repay in kind, I managed to produce some pieces of my own I still feel really quite proud of. So even though Sophie has since proclaimed she can no longer read any of it out of sheer cringe, I have it on pretty reliable account that at the time they were well received, and that’s enough for me.

I wrote something, and someone, even if they were just one person, liked it. To them, it mattered. It was worth reading. And rereading, and considering. And the narrative tricks I used, they weren’t just for fun. <a href="previews/ORVBUIB.md" class="expand-essay">They were to get a point across. One I truly wanted to be heard.</a> And one the recipient truly wanted to understand. It’s funny actually, in a life-tends-to-be-a-whole-lot-more-thematically-coherent-than-we-give-it-credit-for kind of way, that it was also Sophie about whom I wrote the oldest piece included in the 'Letter to Clara' essay collection which inspired this one. The piece, a poem called ‘Sometimes you meet a person’, clashed with the form of the rest of that collection. But I felt compelled to include it precisely because it had been one of the first pieces I had gotten personal positive feedback on. Where someone had told me: ‘Wow, you really captured that experience well’ after reading it. Where I felt, I suppose, like my writing had some purpose larger than just <a href="previews/ORTTYAR.md" class="expand-essay">reorganising and saving my own thoughts.</a>

And that, really, is the motivation that I want to use to fuel my creative fire. Not the imaginary adoration of imaginary fans. But a real, genuine: ‘I liked that, it made me think some thoughts and inspired me to do some writing of my own’ from a dear friend. That’s the target I am shooting for. The why I am ascribing to all this self-indulgent nonsense. The north star, towards which I will use any feedback I receive to head. And once that motivation runs out, once I get the sense the work I share is actually only being read to indulge me, or maybe once someone finally has the courage to say as much to my face, I will return to focusing my rambles on far more unhinged journal entries which really and truly are for my eyes only. It’s much less work that way anyway. 

For now though, I will endeavour onwards, sinking untold hours of my life into these pages. I will stay open to feedback and signals if someone thinks I am on the wrong path, but I will choose to believe, even if it just self-placation, that I am doing this all for a reason. I suppose there is no way of knowing whether such a decision is objectively correct. That is part of the unbearable lightness of being. But choosing to write recently, and to write a lot, has certainly felt pretty damn great.

Not many people have read the things I have written, and not many will. That is fine. Because the people who do, who have and who will matter to me. And if even some of them take joy in these words, well I’d say that is enough. That’s about all the motivation I need. Now I just need to sit down and get writing.