 *I stand up from my chair at the bar. It creaks and groans on the strangely tiled floor as I push it back. No one notices, though. As it has been doing for the last 5 months, Taipei leaves me feeling small and insignificant. I can’t really complain, it should be said. Life here moves fast and slow in all the right places. And besides, the next city is only around the corner.*

*I’ll be missing it all soon. The neon street signs and throngs of scooters. The soft and delicious radish cakes for breakfast. Chester and Hope and all my newest friends, and the evenings spent singing Karaoke until our throats hurt.*  

*Outside the bar, shoe hitting pavement, I see there has been a flash of rain. Presumably while I was inside, although I don’t remember hearing anything. Some things pass unnoticed, despite my attempts to ponder it all. The air is hot and humid and demands attention, yet my mind is elsewhere.  Somewhere deep inside me, the impulse from earlier remains alive, but barely. I try to follow it, but I don’t know where it wants me to go. I start walking regardless. Nothing about the moment is saying to stop, so I don’t.*  

*I only slow my pace for a second to focus my gaze on a couple beyond the dusty glass of a restaurant. He is elegantly dressed and his hair would give anyone the right to be jealous. She sits cross-legged and gazes, intently, through his face and into his soul. I reflect on the feeling of being truly in love. It has perhaps been some time. Not that I have given up. No intention to. An old man with a mountain of bottles attached to the back of his rickshaw motors past, his eyes fixed on the road ahead. I wonder what it would be like to be him.*

*I stop for a second at a bench and pull out my notebook, thoughts oozing out onto the page effortlessly as I finally break past the mental block one particular piece had me in for the last weeks. I take the time to sketch out the outline of the final paragraph and note down some phrasings which feel particularly apt before the impetus fades and I feel it is time to move onwards. As I amble ever further towards nothing I am thinking of who I'll send the piece to and what they might think about it. The newly familiar smell of stinky tofu pulls me back into the cityscape.*

*I come eventually to an intersection, and turn right to stare down a wide road. Cars flow up and down encircled by mopeds as the neon characters of street signs are reflected in the leftover rain, and the densely packed shops and bar fronts frame the scene of unique medley. I suppose this must have been where the impulse was taking me. Hard to complain. I take a breath and allow a smile to form as I appreciate the view and the novelty. What a privilege it is to be born to a planet full of so many singularly unique views just like this. Life tastes good. Somewhere at the back of my mind, I am already thinking with anticipation about Rio. I take out my phone to reach out to some local friends. Only so much time anywhere, best to spend it wisely. The smile lingers.*