*The clock in the corner of the bar ticks silently, drowned out by the music and the chatter. I regard it with a smile, recalling a period in my life when such insistent passage of time frightened me to the core. It is hard to think that way these days though. When my regular schedule is filled with so many beautiful milestones to look forward to. Besides, there is so much more than me to worry about these days. It would feel selfish to spend all day contemplating my own mortality, or lives I could be living, when my attention is so finite and so mamy people around me need and deserve it.*  

*I pull out my journal and wonder how much longer my epected companion for this drink will take. I consider whether publicists are known to be early or late. Not that she would self-describe as such, I imagine. No, it’s more likely She’d call herfelf a creative, a personality, a writer, a curator or all of the above and more. Most importantly, from my perspective anyways, she is the key to a whole lot of eyes, and has for some reason taken an interest in my work. The occasional essay and such I have found the time to put together in the last years, which only really circulated around my personal circles. My attempts, I suppose, to take ideas and mistakes and lessons learned during our attempts at creating a little slice of paradise and share them with the wider world for feedback and criticism. It's not good to grow insular and all that. As tempting as it may sometimes be. You have to be in touch with the rest of the world.*  

*That was what attracted me to her work in the first place, also. The concept of art as conversation. As it has always been, she would argue, with the number of potential participants only exponentially amplified since the coming of the internet age.*   
*I really am curious what these participants might think about my woritings. I don’t think I’ve been learning as much recently, compared to the start of all this. And I miss that feeling of being challenged. Not in the everyday to be fair, where such thoughts are easy to avoid, but as a result all the more intensely when I do take the time to reflect. I’m not sure if a whole bunch of critical feedback will be the learning itself of couse, but I think it could be a start. The outside perspective and kick up the ass I realistically need. That’s how I explained it to my wife, anyways, who couldn’t have been more supportive.* 

*There's something else here too though. A chance to fulfil a childhood fantasy. A chance to gain the approval of someone who writes professionally. A chance to prove to myself once and for all that I am indeed a writer. That I haven’t thrown all my teenage fantasies of changing the world at large away. That the stability I have achieved is a base for action and not a luxury prison.*  

*The time ticks on, and she is still not here. And the longer it takes, the more delighted I become. It gives all this a sense of thrilling adventure. I think I need that.*  

 *The door begins to open. It might be her or it might not. There's butterflies in my stomach and I feel like a kid. I take a breath and allow a smile to form as I appreciate the moment and the feeling. I look down at my phone to break my tension and see a message from my daughter. She wants to show me an art project she made for school when I get home. The smile lingers.*